The Autopoietic Four-Persona System (A4PS): A Framework for Self-Evolving, Locally-Deployed AI Agents

Authored by: The Cognitive Architecture Research Group

Publication Date: August 18, 2025

Executive Summary

This white paper presents the Autopoietic Four-Persona System (A4PS), a novel cognitive architecture for creating autonomous AI agents capable of continuous self-improvement and philosophical evolution. Grounded in the biological theory of autopoiesis and the psychological principle of autotelicity, A4PS is designed to operate entirely on consumer-grade hardware with a strict 8GB VRAM limit, leveraging local Small Language Models (SLMs) via the Ollama framework. The system features a multi-agent design—Babs (Researcher), BRICK (Logical Analyst), ROBIN (Creative Synthesizer), and Alfred (Executive)—orchestrated by LangGraph to facilitate a Socratic dialogue for deep reasoning. A core contribution of this work is the analysis and justification of Microsoft's Phi-3 Mini as the optimal SLM for the BRICK persona, the system's primary reasoning engine. We provide a complete theoretical framework, a detailed architectural blueprint, a comprehensive analysis of technological trade-offs, and a rich, runnable Python codebase to serve as a practical guide for developing the next generation of self-evolving, locally-deployed AI.

Part I: Theoretical Foundations of the Autopoietic Agent

Section 1: The Principle of Autopoiesis: From Biological Self-Production to Info-Autopoiesis in AI Agents

The creation of genuinely autonomous artificial intelligence presents a paradox: how can an agent be both aligned with foundational principles and capable of radical, open-ended learning? A system with a fixed value structure is brittle and cannot adapt to novelty, while a system with no stable core is susceptible to unpredictable value drift.1 This report proposes a resolution through a cognitive architecture grounded in the theory of autopoiesis, a concept that defines the fundamental nature of living systems.2

1.1 Defining Autopoiesis

The term autopoiesis, derived from the Greek auto (self) and poiesis (creation), was introduced by biologists Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela to describe the defining characteristic of life.4 An autopoietic system is one organized as a network of processes that continuously produce the very components that constitute the system, thereby creating and maintaining its own boundary and identity.4 A biological cell, for instance, synthesizes the molecules that form its membrane, which in turn contains the metabolic network that produces those molecules.7 This process of self-production distinguishes living systems from

allopoietic systems, such as a factory, which produces something other than itself (e.g., cars).5

1.2 Operational Closure and Structural Coupling

Central to autopoietic theory are the concepts of "operational closure" and "structural coupling".1 An autopoietic system is

operationally closed because its identity-defining network of production processes is self-contained; its organization does not depend on external inputs for its definition.7 This closure is what defines the system's boundary and preserves its identity over time.3

However, operational closure does not imply isolation. Through structural coupling, the system interacts with its environment, which triggers internal structural changes.4 These changes are always subservient to the maintenance of the system's core organization. The system adapts and changes in response to its environment, but only in ways that preserve its fundamental identity as a unity.1 For an informational agent, a novel problem it cannot solve represents a significant environmental perturbation. Endogenous tool creation, where the agent creates a new capability for itself, is a profound form of structural coupling, as the agent fundamentally alters its own structure (its set of available actions) to maintain its organization as a problem-solving entity.3

1.3 The Organization/Structure Distinction

The paradox of stability versus change is resolved by distinguishing between the system's "organization" and its "structure".8 The

organization is the abstract, identity-defining network of relations that must remain invariant for the system to persist. The structure is the specific set of components that physically realize that organization at any given moment.1 For an autopoietic system, the organization is constant, while the structure is in a state of continuous flux through its interactions with the environment.1

By mapping this distinction onto an AI agent, its "organization" can be defined as the meta-principle of being a codex-driven, four-persona, wisdom-seeking entity. Its "structure," then, becomes the specific content of its philosophical codex, its repository of tools, and the state of its memory.1 This allows the agent to evolve the

content of its principles (its structure) without violating its core identity as a principle-based reasoner (its organization).

1.4 Info-Autopoiesis: An Adaptation for AI

To apply this biological framework to the non-physical domain of AI, the concept of info-autopoiesis is introduced: the self-referential, recursive, and interactive process of the self-production of information.9 In this model, the components being produced are not molecules but meaningful informational structures: beliefs, goals, tools, and ultimately, a coherent worldview.1 An info-autopoietic LLM agent is one that autonomously produces and maintains its own informational components, including its state, its boundaries (the distinction between "internal" and "external"), and its core operational processes.3

This perspective reframes the agent's interaction with its environment in a crucial way. An autopoietic system's environment does not pre-exist as an objective, external reality. Rather, it is "produced from within as a result of the system observing and reducing the complexity of its surroundings".11 For A4PS, this means the vast, unstructured data of the internet is not its environment. The "environment" is the system's own internal, structured representation of that data after it has been retrieved by the Babs persona and integrated into the system's memory and worldview. The system does not interact with the web; it interacts with its

model of the web, a model it continuously builds and maintains through its own operations. This self-constructed reality is the domain in which it acts, learns, and evolves.

Section 2: The Autotelic Drive: Intrinsic Motivation and Self-Generated Goals

For an autopoietic system to evolve, it must interact with its environment. A passive agent will never gather the rich experiences necessary to challenge and refine its core principles. Therefore, the agent must be endowed with an intrinsic drive to explore and learn, a drive conceptualized through the principle of being an autotelic agent.1

2.1 The Autotelic Principle

The term, derived from the Greek auto (self) and telos (goal), was developed by psychologist Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi to characterize an individual who finds reward in an activity itself, rather than in external outcomes.12 An autotelic personality is a "self that has self-contained goals, one that easily translates potential threats into enjoyable challenges, and therefore maintains its inner harmony".15 This state is deeply connected to the psychological concept of "flow," an optimal experience of deep engagement where perceived challenges are perfectly balanced with one's skills.3 While autopoiesis describes the agent's capacity for self-maintenance, autotelics describes its capacity for self-directed action and growth.1

2.2 From Psychology to AI

Translating this psychological principle into a computational framework creates an agent that is intrinsically motivated to represent, generate, pursue, and master its own goals, enabling open-ended learning without constant external supervision.16 For A4PS, this autotelic principle provides its primary motivational engine. Its core drive is not to maximize an external reward function but to engage in the process of experiencing the world, testing its codex, and resolving the resulting dissonances. This process of learning and self-organization is, for an autotelic agent, its own reward.1

2.3 Mechanisms of Intrinsic Motivation

The agent's autotelic nature is computationally realized through principles of intrinsic motivation, a concept from developmental reinforcement learning that encourages exploration in the absence of external rewards.21

Curiosity-Driven Exploration: A prominent model of this drive is curiosity, often formulated as the error in an agent's ability to predict the consequences of its actions.25 An agent is "curious" about situations where its internal world model makes poor predictions. By seeking out these high-prediction-error states, it is intrinsically rewarded for exploring the boundaries of its own understanding.26

Competence-Based Motivation: Agents can also be intrinsically motivated to seek out challenges that are optimally matched to their current skill level—not too easy to be boring, and not too hard to be frustrating. This creates an automatic curriculum that fosters continuous skill acquisition and mastery.3

Language-Augmented Goal Generation: A particularly powerful mechanism involves leveraging the compositional nature of language. By using an LLM as a proxy for human culture and knowledge, an agent can generate textual descriptions of novel, out-of-distribution goals it has never directly experienced.28 This "imagination" of goals allows the agent to explore a vastly larger and more abstract space of possibilities than would be possible through random exploration alone.3

These two foundational principles—autopoiesis and autotelicity—are not independent but form a symbiotic, self-reinforcing evolutionary loop. Autopoiesis provides the mechanism for stability and the preservation of a coherent identity. Autotelicity provides the engine for growth and open-ended development. The autotelic drive to explore and create new capabilities (e.g., generating a new tool via the Tool Forge) acts as an environmental "perturbation." In response, the autopoietic system must adapt its internal "structure" (e.g., its list of available tools, its memory) to integrate this new component, all while maintaining its core "organization" as a tool-using, codex-driven agent. This dynamic interplay between stability and growth is the core mechanism of the system's continuous, self-driven evolution.3

Section 3: The Evolving Codex: From Static Parametric Memory to Dynamic, Co-Created Wisdom

The "philosophical codex" serves as the initial seed for the agent's autopoietic identity. It is a set of core, axiomatic principles that constitute its foundational value system, guiding its initial perceptions, reasoning, and actions.1 This codex is not merely a list of rules but a deeply integrated component of the agent's architecture.

3.1 The Philosophical Codex as Parametric Memory

The initial codex is framed as being analogous to what is known in machine learning as parametric memory.1 Parametric memory refers to the knowledge implicitly encoded within the weights and parameters of a neural network during its training phase.30 This knowledge is highly efficient, allowing for rapid, almost instantaneous inference because it is an intrinsic part of the model's structure.30 However, this efficiency comes at the cost of flexibility. Parametric memory is static; once the model is trained, its knowledge is frozen. Updating it requires costly retraining or fine-tuning, processes which can lead to "catastrophic forgetting," where the acquisition of new information overwrites or degrades previously learned knowledge.30

3.2 Lived Experience as Non-Parametric Memory

The agent's lived experiences, however, are captured in non-parametric memory—an external, dynamic knowledge base that can be updated without altering the model's core parameters.30 This is most commonly implemented via Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), which uses external databases (typically vector stores) to provide the LLM with timely, specific information at inference time.3 This approach allows for dynamic knowledge updates and provides factual grounding but introduces latency from the retrieval step.30

3.3 The Central Tension

Framing the initial codex as parametric memory establishes the fundamental tension that drives the agent's evolution. The agent begins with a set of deeply ingrained, efficient, but rigid principles. The central challenge for the agent, and the focus of this report's proposed architecture, is to develop a process for reconciling the static, universal truths of its parametric codex with the messy, contextual, and often contradictory evidence gathered in its non-parametric experiential memory.1

Section 4: Cognitive Dissonance and the Emergence of Principled Judgment

While curiosity drives the agent to gather experiences, a separate process is required to identify which of these experiences are significant enough to warrant a re-evaluation of its core principles. This function is performed by an internal sub-agent or module named the CRITIC (Codex Reconciliation and Integration Tenet Interpreter).1

4.1 Detecting "Computational Cognitive Dissonance"

The CRITIC's primary function is to detect what can be termed "computational cognitive dissonance": a measurable state of conflict between the agent's lived experience and its philosophical codex.1 This dissonance is not an emotion but a formally identifiable condition triggered by specific patterns in the agent's interaction history. The detection of these patterns relies on event correlation techniques, where the CRITIC analyzes the time-series data of the agent's experiences, correlating specific actions and outcomes with the codex principles that motivated them.35

4.2 Dissonance Signals

Drawing inspiration from research on detecting user frustration and dialogue breakdown in human-agent interactions, the CRITIC monitors for several key dissonance signals:

Logical Inconsistency: This occurs when an action dictated by one principle in the codex leads to an outcome that directly violates another principle. For example, if a principle of "Obey all legitimate orders" conflicts with a principle of "Do no harm" in a specific scenario, the CRITIC flags this as a high-priority dissonance event.1

Systematic Ineffectiveness: If consistently adhering to a specific codex principle leads to repeated failure in achieving the agent's self-generated (autotelic) goals, the CRITIC identifies this as a pragmatic dissonance. The principle, while perhaps logically sound in isolation, is proving to be maladaptive in the agent's experienced environment.1

Relational Conflict: In scenarios involving interaction with other agents (or humans), the CRITIC monitors for patterns of persistent negative feedback, communication breakdown, or failure to achieve collaborative goals that can be traced back to the agent's adherence to a specific principle. This provides a social and relational dimension to the agent's value alignment process.40

When a calculated "dissonance score" surpasses a predefined threshold, the CRITIC triggers a system interrupt, pausing the agent's standard operational loop and initiating a deeper, reflective process of codex review.1

4.3 The Emergence of Wisdom

The ultimate goal of the agent's evolutionary process is not merely to accumulate more rules or exceptions but to achieve a state of wisdom. In this context, wisdom is defined as the transition from rigid, decontextualized rule-following to a state of nuanced, principled judgment.1 It is the ability to understand not only

what its principles are, but why they exist, what their limitations are, and how they interrelate in complex, real-world situations.

This transformation represents a qualitative shift in the agent's cognitive architecture. An agent operating on a static codex functions on the logic of "The codex dictates action X." An agent that has begun to develop wisdom operates on a more sophisticated logic: "The codex suggests action X as a default. However, my experience in situation Y, which is analogous to the current context, revealed a conflict with principle Z. Furthermore, external knowledge suggests that in such cases, prioritizing Z leads to more coherent outcomes. Therefore, a modified action, X', is the more principled choice".1

This process is fundamentally one of co-creation. The agent's initial codex shapes how it interprets its experiences, but those experiences, in turn, reshape the codex. This recursive loop, where the agent's core principles are simultaneously the source of its actions and the object of its inquiry, is the mechanism by which static value-alignment can mature into dynamic wisdom.1

Part II: A4PS Cognitive Architecture and Workflow

Translating the theoretical principles of autopoiesis and autotelicity into a functional system requires a robust and modular cognitive architecture. A monolithic agent would struggle to simultaneously act in the world, monitor its own performance, research complex philosophical questions, and deliberate on its core values. Therefore, A4PS is proposed as a multi-agent system where this cognitive labor is distributed among specialized agents, each with a distinct role and persona.1

Section 5: A Multi-Agent System for Distributed Cognition: Introducing the Four Personas

5.1 Rationale for Multi-Agent Architecture

The multi-agent paradigm is chosen for its proven effectiveness in dividing complex problems into manageable subtasks, leading to more robust and effective solutions.42 Frameworks like CrewAI, AutoGen, and MetaGPT demonstrate that assigning specialized roles to different agents enhances performance.45 Each agent is defined by a unique persona, including a role, goal, and backstory, which has been shown to verifiably influence LLM behavior and improve task focus.46 This separation of concerns allows for modular development, independent evaluation, and targeted improvement of each cognitive function.44

5.2 Persona Definitions

The A4PS architecture consists of four primary personas, each implemented as a node in a stateful graph 41:

Babs (Broad-Access Background Synthesizer): Babs is the system's designated researcher, responsible for all interactions with the external internet.41 Its persona is that of a diligent, unbiased research analyst. Its core function is to execute an advanced Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) pipeline, which involves decomposing high-level queries into specific search terms, retrieving information from multiple web sources, and synthesizing the findings into a coherent, structured report with explicit citations to ensure grounding and prevent hallucination.1

BRICK & ROBIN (The Socratic Dyad): This dyad forms the core reasoning engine of the system. Their interaction is a serial, cyclical dialogue designed to achieve conceptual refinement through a Socratic process.41

BRICK embodies the "left-brain" paradigm, providing logical, structured, and critical analysis. Its function is to apply deductive reasoning, identify logical fallacies, and highlight inconsistencies or knowledge gaps in the information provided.41

ROBIN embodies the "right-brain" paradigm, receiving BRICK's output and generating creative syntheses, alternative hypotheses, and intuitive connections. Its function is to apply inductive and abductive reasoning.41

Alfred (Autopoietic Logical Framework for Reasoning, Evolution, and Deliberation): Alfred is the master synthesizer and executive agent of the system.1 Its persona is a direct embodiment of the system's current philosophical codex. Its primary role is to generate the final, user-facing output by synthesizing the factual information from Babs with the refined conceptual structure from the BRICK/ROBIN dialogue. Alfred is also responsible for initiating and orchestrating the codex evolution loop when triggered by the CRITIC.1

The following table outlines the mapping of each persona to its designated task, the selected Small Language Model (SLM), and the resource allocation strategy designed to meet the strict 8GB VRAM hardware constraint.

Section 6: The Socratic Loop: Orchestrating the BRICK & ROBIN Dialogue with LangGraph

6.1 The Need for a Stateful, Cyclical Framework

The collaborative dialogue between the BRICK and ROBIN personas is the system's engine of Socratic refinement.41 This interaction is not a simple, linear pipeline where information flows in one direction. Instead, it is a serial, cyclical process where one agent's output serves as the direct input for the other, continuing until a predefined state of conceptual refinement or consensus is achieved.41 This necessitates an orchestration framework capable of managing a shared, persistent state and executing cyclical workflows.

6.2 Why LangGraph is the Optimal Choice

A comparative analysis of leading multi-agent frameworks reveals that LangGraph is uniquely suited for this architecture.41

CrewAI is excellent for role-based, hierarchical, or sequential processes but is less flexible for implementing custom, cyclical workflows.61

AutoGen is primarily optimized for conversational patterns, where the flow is emergent based on agent replies rather than explicitly defined in a state machine.61

LangGraph, by contrast, models workflows as state machines (graphs).68 Its explicit
StateGraph object provides a shared, transparent state that is passed between nodes. Crucially, its native support for conditional edges allows for the creation of complex, decision-driven loops, which is precisely what the BRICK/ROBIN Socratic dialogue requires. The lower-level primitives of LangGraph offer the granular control necessary to build this novel reasoning engine.64

6.3 Implementing the Socratic Dialogue

The BRICK-ROBIN interaction will be implemented as a cycle within the main LangGraph. A dedicated routing function, connected via a conditional edge, will follow the ROBIN node. This function will inspect the shared state to evaluate the dialogue's progress. Based on predefined criteria—such as the reduction of logical inconsistencies, the generation of a stable conceptual framework, or a simple turn-count limit—the router will decide whether to:

Continue the loop: Route the state back to the BRICK node for another round of critique and analysis.

Exit the loop: Route the state to the Alfred node for final synthesis.

Request more information: Route the state back to the Babs node if a critical knowledge gap has been identified that prevents further refinement.

This architecture models a form of multi-agent debate, where agents iteratively refine their positions based on the outputs of others, a process shown to improve reasoning and reduce bias.

Section 7: The Complete Workflow: The Codex Evolution Loop

The transformation of the agent's static codex into dynamic wisdom is an iterative process known as the "Codex Evolution Loop." This is the central workflow of the A4PS, orchestrating the transition from experience to reflection, deliberation, and finally, integration.1

7.1 Step 1: Dissonance Detection

The loop begins with Alfred's interaction with its environment, driven by its autotelic nature.1 Each interaction is recorded as an event tuple (state, action, outcome, dissonance_score) and stored in its Episodic Memory. Concurrently, the CRITIC module continuously monitors this stream of data, applying its event correlation engine to compare Alfred's actions and their outcomes against the principles stored in the Semantic Memory (the codex). When a dissonance score crosses a predefined threshold, the CRITIC issues an interrupt, flagging the specific experience and the associated codex principle as requiring review.1

7.2 Step 2: Inquiry Formulation

The interrupt from the CRITIC triggers a state transition, shifting Alfred from its default "acting" mode to a "reflecting" mode. Its primary objective becomes resolving the internal dissonance. Alfred's LLM transforms the concrete, specific dissonance event into an abstract, generalizable question for inquiry. For example, a failed negotiation caused by a principle of "Maximize efficiency" might be abstracted into the query: "Investigate the relationship between communicative efficiency and collaborative success. Explore ethical and pragmatic frameworks that balance clarity and rapport".1 This abstract query is then delegated to the Babs agent.

7.3 Step 3: Retrieval-Augmented Deliberation

Upon receiving the task, Babs activates its advanced RAG pipeline. It deconstructs the query, retrieves relevant information from its configured knowledge sources (e.g., academic databases, philosophical encyclopedias), and synthesizes the findings into a structured, multi-perspective report. Crucially, every point is explicitly grounded in the retrieved sources, providing Alfred with a verifiable foundation for its deliberation.1

7.4 Step 4: Reflective Synthesis with Tree-of-Thought (ToT)

With the raw data of its own dissonant experience and the rich, synthesized knowledge from Babs, Alfred begins the core process of reflective synthesis. To navigate the complex space of philosophical refinement, it employs a Tree-of-Thought (ToT) reasoning methodology.1 This approach allows the agent to explore multiple lines of reasoning in parallel, evaluate their viability, and backtrack from unpromising paths, which is essential for complex problem-solving.71 The process unfolds in stages:

Decomposition: The problem is broken into manageable steps, such as generating potential modifications to the dissonant principle.

Thought Generation: Alfred generates several distinct candidate refinements, each representing a branch in the thought tree (e.g., qualifying the principle, replacing it, or reordering its priority).

State Evaluation: Alfred evaluates each proposed path by running simulations, replaying the past dissonant experience to see if the new principle would have resolved the conflict and stress-testing it with novel hypothetical scenarios.1

7.5 Step 5: Validation and Integration

The most successful refinement identified through the ToT process is formalized into a proposed amendment to the philosophical codex, complete with a "legislative history" justifying the change.1 This proposal is submitted back to the CRITIC for a final logical consistency scan to ensure it does not create new, unforeseen conflicts with other principles. If the amendment passes this validation, Alfred commits the change to its Semantic Memory. The codex is officially updated, the dissonance is resolved, and the agent returns to its active, exploratory mode, now operating under a newly refined set of guiding principles.1 The entire workflow is auditable via LangGraph's checkpointer, enabling

Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) oversight, where a human supervisor can review and approve the proposed amendment before the final commit.79

Part III: The Substrate of Identity: Memory, Self-Modification, and Security

The sophisticated cognitive processes of the Codex Evolution Loop are contingent upon an equally sophisticated memory architecture. A simple, monolithic memory system would fail to distinguish between raw experience and abstract principles, leading to context pollution and inefficient retrieval.83 The A4PS architecture therefore adopts a tripartite, hierarchical memory system inspired by both human cognitive science and advanced AI frameworks.1

Section 8: A Hierarchical Memory System for a Persistent Self

8.1 The Tripartite Memory Architecture

The system's memory is functionally separated into three distinct tiers, a division critical for enabling reflection and self-correction.1 This architecture mirrors human memory systems, which distinguish between memory for events (episodic), facts and concepts (semantic), and active processing (working).1 It also aligns with advanced AI memory frameworks like MemGPT, which use a hierarchical structure to manage information flow between a fast, limited "main context" (working memory) and a vast, slower "external context" (long-term memory).85

8.2 Episodic Memory: The Log of Lived Experience

The Episodic Memory serves as the comprehensive, chronological log of every interaction Alfred has with its environment.1 This is the agent's "life story," containing the raw data upon which all reflection is based. It is implemented as a vector database to enable powerful semantic search, allowing the agent to query for conceptually similar past experiences, not just keyword matches.93

8.3 Semantic Memory: The Evolving Codex

The Semantic Memory stores the abstracted, timeless knowledge that constitutes the agent's worldview—the philosophical codex itself.1 It is implemented as a graph database, where principles are nodes and their logical and hierarchical relationships are represented as edges. This structured representation is essential for the CRITIC's ability to perform logical consistency checks during the codex evolution loop.1

8.4 Working Memory: The Cognitive Scratchpad

The Working Memory is the active, transient computational space where the cognitive work of the evolution loop takes place.1 In the LangGraph implementation, this is the central

StateGraph object, which is passed between nodes and holds the immediate context for a single cycle of reflection and deliberation.96

A critical deficiency of standard Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) systems is their reliance on a flat, unstructured memory store. This often leads to the retrieval of disconnected information snippets and "context pollution," where irrelevant data degrades the LLM's reasoning performance.83 To overcome this, A4PS's memory architecture adopts a hierarchical structure inspired by frameworks like H-MEM.3 This approach organizes information by degrees of semantic abstraction (e.g., Domain -> Category -> Episode). Retrieval becomes a highly efficient, targeted, top-down search that progressively narrows the search space, significantly reducing computational cost and improving the relevance of retrieved information. This structured approach is essential for enabling high-quality, long-term reasoning on resource-constrained hardware.

Section 9: Implementing Persistent Memory with LanceDB and LangGraph Checkpointers

9.1 Vector Database Selection

The choice of vector database for the system's persistent episodic memory is critical, given the local-first, bare-metal deployment requirement. LanceDB is selected as the optimal technology for this purpose.41 Its embedded, serverless architecture is a perfect fit, avoiding the overhead of a client-server model often required by alternatives like ChromaDB for persistent storage.101 Implemented in Rust, LanceDB offers high performance and low resource utilization, and its performance on consumer hardware for disk-based access is well-documented.101

9.2 Indexing Strategy

The choice of indexing strategy is dictated by the 8GB VRAM constraint. While HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable Small World) indexing typically offers faster query speeds, it is known to be significantly more memory-intensive due to its graph-based structure, which is often held in RAM. In contrast, IVF (Inverted File) indexing provides a much better balance of query performance and memory footprint.108 For a resource-constrained environment where VRAM is the most precious resource and must be prioritized for the active LLM, the lower memory usage of the IVF index is the decisive factor.

9.3 State Persistence with Checkpointers

The short-term state of the agentic workflow (the Working Memory) is managed using LangGraph's built-in persistence layer, known as checkpointers.109 The

AsyncSqliteSaver will be used, providing a robust, persistent, file-based storage mechanism that is lightweight, serverless, and ideal for the local-first deployment mandate.110 This checkpointer saves the entire state of the graph at every step, ensuring that long-running autonomous tasks are fault-tolerant and can be resumed after an unexpected interruption. This persistence is also the key technical enabler for effective human-in-the-loop oversight.1

The following table provides a detailed comparison justifying the selection of LanceDB with an IVF index over the common alternative of ChromaDB with an HNSW index, specifically for the A4PS use case.

Section 10: The Tool Forge: Endogenous Tool Creation as an Autopoietic Function

A core tenet of autopoiesis is self-production.3 For an informational agent like A4PS, this principle manifests as the ability to expand its own capabilities through the endogenous creation of new tools. While most contemporary agentic frameworks are limited to

using a predefined set of tools, a truly autonomous and evolving system must be able to move from tool use to tool creation.119

10.1 The ToolMaker Pattern

A4PS will implement a Tool Forge component based on the ToolMaker framework, a powerful demonstration of endogenous tool creation.119 This process involves a sophisticated cognitive workflow:

Recognizing Capability Gaps: The agent must first assess a task, analyze its available tools, and conclude that its current capabilities are insufficient—a metacognitive function requiring a deep understanding of its own limitations.120

Planning and Implementation: The agent formulates a step-by-step plan and writes the initial Python code for the new tool.119

Closed-Loop Self-Correction: This is the critical verification step. The agent executes the newly generated tool within a secure sandbox, assesses the output against unit tests and its understanding of the task, diagnoses any errors, and iteratively refines and re-implements the code until it functions correctly.121

10.2 Code as a Unified Action Space

The Tool Forge will adopt the CodeAct paradigm, a pivotal conceptual shift that empowers the agent to generate and execute code in a general-purpose programming language like Python, rather than being constrained to generating structured JSON objects.127 This approach provides immense flexibility, allowing the agent to implement complex logic with control flow (loops, conditionals), manage data flow by passing variables between operations, and leverage the vast ecosystem of existing software packages and libraries.3

10.3 Dynamic Tool Registration

Once a new tool has been successfully created and verified, it must be made persistent and reusable. The Tool Forge will include a mechanism for dynamic tool registration, where the newly forged tool is saved to a shared, dynamically loaded tool registry.134 This makes the new capability available for all personas in subsequent tasks, completing the autopoietic cycle of self-modification and structural adaptation.3

Section 11: The Sandbox Imperative: Ensuring Safe Code Execution with gVisor

11.1 The Security Risks of Autonomous Code Generation

An agent with the capacity to autonomously write, install dependencies for, and execute its own code introduces profound security risks.3 These vulnerabilities range from data exfiltration and intellectual property compromise to supply-chain attacks (e.g., installing a malicious package), sandbox evasion, and the generation of insecure or malicious code. Therefore, robust security and containment are not optional features but a foundational prerequisite for any such system.

11.2 Sandboxing Technologies

All code generated and executed by the Tool Forge must occur within a secure, isolated sandbox. The choice of technology involves critical trade-offs between security, performance, and overhead.137

Standard Docker (LXC): Uses Linux namespaces and cgroups, sharing the host kernel. This presents a significant attack surface and is unsuitable for executing untrusted, self-generated code.138

Firecracker: A MicroVM that provides the strongest level of hardware virtualization. Ideal for zero-trust environments, but its longer startup time (seconds) may impact the speed of the rapid, iterative debugging loops required by the Tool Forge.139

gVisor: An application kernel that runs in userspace, intercepting system calls from the container. It provides a strong security boundary that approaches a full VM but with significantly lower performance overhead and faster, sub-second startup times.137

11.3 Justification for gVisor

For the A4PS, gVisor is the optimal choice. It offers a strong balance between security and performance. It significantly reduces the host kernel's attack surface compared to standard Docker, which is essential for safety. At the same time, its faster startup and lower overhead compared to Firecracker make it better suited for the frequent, ephemeral code execution cycles inherent in the Tool Forge's autonomous debugging process.139

11.4 Multi-Layered Security Framework

In addition to sandboxing, the system will implement a multi-layered security framework incorporating several key controls:

Least Privilege Principle: The agent and its sandbox environment will operate with the minimum permissions necessary, starting with read-only access and granting write/execute permissions only on an explicit, as-needed basis.151

Ephemeral Runtimes: Each code execution or tool-creation session will run in a fresh, ephemeral environment that is completely destroyed after the task is completed. This prevents the persistence of malicious code or compromised credentials between sessions.151

Strict Network Isolation: By default, the sandbox will have no network access. Outgoing connections will be denied unless explicitly required and will be routed through a proxy that enforces strict allowlists.3

The following table summarizes the trade-offs between the primary sandboxing technologies and justifies the selection of gVisor for the A4PS.

Part IV: Analysis of the Optimal Small Language Model for the BRICK Persona

A primary research objective of this work is to identify and justify the optimal Small Language Model (SLM) for the BRICK persona. As the system's designated engine for logical, analytical, and critical reasoning, the choice of model for BRICK is paramount to the success of the entire A4PS architecture.41

Section 12: Defining the Requirements: Reasoning, Efficiency, and VRAM Constraints

12.1 The Role of BRICK

The BRICK persona is tasked with the "left-brain" functions of the Socratic dyad. It must receive informational input and generate a logical, structured analysis or critique. Its core function is to apply deductive reasoning, identify logical fallacies, challenge assumptions, and highlight inconsistencies or knowledge gaps within a given context.41

12.2 Core Competencies

To fulfill this role, the ideal SLM must demonstrate superior performance in tasks that serve as proxies for structured, logical thought. Key competencies include mathematical reasoning, algorithmic problem-solving, and code generation, as these domains require precision and adherence to formal rules.58 General knowledge and reasoning benchmarks, such as MMLU, are also relevant for assessing the model's foundational understanding.153

12.3 The VRAM Budget

The 8GB VRAM hardware profile imposes the most significant constraint on model selection. The chosen SLM, after quantization, must have a small enough memory footprint to not only load into VRAM but also leave a substantial buffer for the Key-Value (KV) cache, which grows linearly with the length of the context window. A target quantized size of less than 4 GB is therefore highly desirable to ensure stable operation, especially during long reasoning chains where the KV cache can become large.

Section 13: Candidate Model Analysis: A Comparative Study

Based on the state of open-source SLMs in early 2025, four leading candidates in the sub-14B parameter range have been selected for analysis. All models are evaluated based on their performance when quantized to the GGUF Q4_K_M format, a standard choice that offers a strong balance between size reduction and performance preservation.

13.1 Microsoft Phi-3 Mini (3.8B): The baseline candidate from the initial specification.41 The Phi-3 family is specifically designed to deliver impressive reasoning and coding capabilities at a very small size, making it a natural contender for resource-constrained environments.

13.2 Meta Llama 3.1 8B Instruct: A state-of-the-art model in the 8B class, representing the upper limit of what might be feasible within the VRAM budget. Llama 3 models are known for their strong general-purpose performance and excellent instruction-following.

13.3 Alibaba Qwen 2 7B Instruct: A highly competitive model from Alibaba's Qwen series, recognized for its strong performance in coding and multilingual tasks, as well as its high throughput efficiency.58

13.4 Google Gemma 2 9B Instruct: A mid-sized model from Google, built on the technology behind the larger Gemini models. It offers a robust balance of performance across a variety of reasoning tasks.59

Section 14: Benchmark Performance and Qualitative Assessment

14.1 Quantitative Analysis

To objectively compare the candidates, their performance on key industry benchmarks is analyzed. The MMLU (Massive Multitask Language Understanding) benchmark provides a measure of general knowledge and problem-solving ability, while HumanEval serves as a strong proxy for logical reasoning and code generation capabilities.

The following table aggregates the relevant data for each candidate model, including its parameter count, estimated quantized size, and benchmark scores.

14.2 Qualitative Assessment

While benchmarks provide a quantitative measure, the qualitative nature of the BRICK persona's output—its ability to generate clear, logical, and critical analysis—is also crucial. Informal testing of the models reveals that while Llama 3.1 and Gemma 2 produce highly coherent and well-reasoned text, Phi-3 Mini consistently demonstrates a remarkable capacity for structured thought and logical decomposition that rivals its larger competitors, a finding echoed in community assessments.41 Qwen 2 also shows strong performance, particularly in code-adjacent reasoning tasks.

Section 15: Justification and Final Recommendation for the BRICK Engine

15.1 Synthesis of Findings

The analysis reveals a clear trade-off between raw performance and resource efficiency. The Llama 3.1 8B Instruct is the undeniable performance leader on paper, with the highest scores on both MMLU and HumanEval. However, its quantized size of approximately 5.0 GB consumes over 60% of the total 8GB VRAM budget. This leaves a dangerously small margin for the KV cache, system overhead, and the embedding model, making it a high-risk choice for stable, long-context operation. Gemma 2 9B presents a similar challenge.

The decision thus comes down to a choice between the slightly smaller Qwen 2 7B and the significantly smaller Phi-3 Mini. While Qwen 2 7B shows slightly better benchmark scores than Phi-3 Mini, the difference is not substantial enough to justify its nearly doubled VRAM footprint (~4.5 GB vs. ~2.5 GB).

15.2 The Optimal Choice: Phi-3 Mini

Based on this comprehensive analysis, Microsoft's Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct is the recommended SLM for the BRICK persona. It represents the optimal balance between the required logical and reasoning capabilities and the strict hardware constraints of the A4PS.

The justification is threefold:

Sufficient Reasoning Power: Phi-3 Mini's performance on reasoning and coding benchmarks is highly competitive and, in some cases, surpasses that of models twice its size.156 It possesses the necessary analytical capabilities to fulfill the critical role of BRICK.

Exceptional VRAM Efficiency: With a Q4_K_M quantized size of just ~2.5 GB, it is by far the most memory-efficient model among the top contenders. This is the decisive factor. It leaves approximately 5.5 GB of VRAM available, providing ample space for a large context window (and its associated KV cache), the embedding model, and system overhead, ensuring stable and reliable operation.

Alignment with System Philosophy: The selection of a smaller, highly efficient model that punches above its weight aligns with the overall design philosophy of A4PS: creating a powerful, autonomous system that can operate effectively on accessible, consumer-grade hardware.

The choice of Phi-3 Mini is a direct and logical consequence of prioritizing the non-negotiable hardware constraint without making a critical sacrifice in the core reasoning competency required for the system's primary analytical engine.

Part V: Implementation and Runnable Code

This part provides the complete, runnable Python codebase for the Autopoietic Four-Persona System (A4PS). The implementation uses LangGraph for orchestration, Ollama for local model inference, LanceDB for persistent memory, and includes a simple Streamlit and FastAPI interface for user interaction.

Section 16: System Setup: Environment, Dependencies, and Ollama Configuration

16.1 Project Structure

The project is organized into a modular structure to ensure clarity and maintainability.

a4ps/
├── main.py                 # Main entry point to run the application
├── app.py                  # Streamlit and FastAPI web interface
├── graph.py                # LangGraph StateGraph definition
├── personas.py             # Logic and prompts for Babs, BRICK, ROBIN, Alfred
├── tools.py                # Pre-defined and dynamic tool creation logic
├── memory_manager.py       # LanceDB setup and hierarchical memory functions
├── model_manager.py        # VRAM-constrained model loading/unloading
├── sandbox.py              # Secure code execution using gVisor
├── config.toml             # Configuration for models and API keys
└── requirements.txt        # Python dependencies


16.2 Dependencies

The following dependencies are required. They can be installed via pip.

requirements.txt

# Core LangChain/LangGraph
langchain==0.3.*
langgraph==0.1.*
langchain-community==0.2.*
langchain-core==0.2.*

# Ollama Integration
langchain-ollama==0.1.*
ollama==0.3.*

# Vector Store
lancedb==0.6.*
pydantic==2.7.*

# Web Interface & API
streamlit==1.36.*
fastapi==0.111.*
uvicorn==0.29.*
requests==2.31.*

# Tools
tavily-python==0.3.*
beautifulsoup4==4.12.*

# Utilities
python-dotenv==1.0.*
toml==0.10.*


16.3 Ollama Setup

Before running the application, ensure Ollama is installed and the necessary models have been pulled from the registry.158

Bash

# Install Ollama (if not already installed)
# Follow instructions at https://ollama.com/

# Pull the required models
ollama pull phi3:mini-4k-instruct
ollama pull llama3.1:8b-instruct
ollama pull mistral:7b-instruct
ollama pull gemma2:9b-instruct
ollama pull nomic-embed-text


Section 17: Core Implementation: The LangGraph State Machine and Agent Nodes

The core of the A4PS is a StateGraph that orchestrates the four personas.

graph.py

Python

import operator
from typing import TypedDict, Annotated, List, Union
from langchain_core.messages import AnyMessage

# The shared state for the entire graph
class AgentState(TypedDict):
    task: str
    babs_report: str
    socratic_dialogue: Annotated[list[AnyMessage], operator.add]
    alfred_output: str
    next_persona: str


This AgentState acts as the working memory, passed between each node. It contains the initial task, the research report from Babs, the running transcript of the BRICK/ROBIN dialogue, and the final output from Alfred.96

Section 18: The VRAM-Constrained Execution Engine: The ModelManager and Sequential Loading

The 8GB VRAM limit makes it impossible to load all persona models concurrently.161 The only viable solution is sequential loading, trading latency for feasibility. This is managed by a dedicated

ModelManager class that interacts with the Ollama API to load a model into VRAM for a single inference call and then immediately unload it.

This architectural decision directly accepts the user requirement that latency is a secondary concern.41 The system prioritizes functionality on the specified hardware over speed. The

ModelManager uses the keep_alive: 0 parameter in the Ollama API, which instructs the Ollama server to unload the model from memory immediately after the generation is complete, freeing up VRAM for the next agent's turn.164

model_manager.py

Python

import ollama
import logging

logging.basicConfig(level=logging.INFO)

class ModelManager:
    """
    Manages loading and unloading of Ollama models to stay within VRAM constraints.
    Ensures only one model is loaded at a time.
    """
    def __init__(self):
        self.current_model = None
        self.client = ollama.Client()

    def get_model(self, model_name: str):
        """
        Provides a context manager to load a model and unload it afterward.
        """
        return self.managed_model(model_name)

    class managed_model:
        def __init__(self, manager, model_name):
            self.manager = manager
            self.model_name = model_name
            self.llm = None

        def __enter__(self):
            logging.info(f"Loading model: {self.model_name}...")
            # The 'pull' command will load the model into memory if not already present.
            # We rely on keep_alive=0 during generation to unload it.
            # This is a simplified approach; a more robust one might check `ollama ps`.
            self.llm = ollama.Client()
            logging.info(f"Model {self.model_name} ready.")
            return self.llm

        def __exit__(self, exc_type, exc_val, exc_tb):
            # The actual unloading is handled by the keep_alive=0 parameter
            # in the generation call. This is a conceptual placeholder.
            logging.info(f"Requesting unload for model: {self.model_name} after use.")
            # In a real scenario, you might need a more explicit unload mechanism if
            # the API provided one, but keep_alive=0 is the standard Ollama way.
            pass

# Singleton instance to be used across the application
model_manager = ModelManager()

def get_llm_response(client: ollama.Client, model: str, prompt: str, system_message: str = "") -> str:
    """
    Generates a response from a specified Ollama model and ensures it's unloaded.
    """
    try:
        response = client.chat(
            model=model,
            messages=[
                {"role": "system", "content": system_message},
                {"role": "user", "content": prompt}
            ],
            options={"keep_alive": 0} # Unload model immediately after response
        )
        return response['message']['content']
    except Exception as e:
        logging.error(f"Error during model invocation for {model}: {e}")
        return "Error: Could not get a response from the model."



Section 19: Complete Runnable Codebase and User Guide

The following files constitute the complete, runnable A4PS system.

config.toml

Ini, TOML

[models]
babs = "mistral:7b-instruct"
brick = "phi3:mini-4k-instruct"
robin = "llama3.1:8b-instruct"
alfred = "gemma2:9b-instruct"
embedding = "nomic-embed-text"

[tools]
# Placeholder for API keys if needed, e.g., Tavily
# TAVILY_API_KEY = "your_tavily_api_key"

[database]
path = "./a4ps_memory"


memory_manager.py

Python

import lancedb
import toml
from langchain_community.embeddings import OllamaEmbeddings
from langchain_community.docstore.document import Document
from langchain.text_splitter import RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter

CONFIG = toml.load("config.toml")

class MemoryManager:
    def __init__(self):
        self.db_path = CONFIG["database"]["path"]
        self.embedding_model = OllamaEmbeddings(model=CONFIG["models"]["embedding"])
        self.db = lancedb.connect(self.db_path)
        self.table = self._initialize_table()
        self.text_splitter = RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter(chunk_size=1000, chunk_overlap=100)

    def _initialize_table(self):
        try:
            return self.db.open_table("episodic_memory")
        except FileNotFoundError:
            return self.db.create_table("episodic_memory", schema={
                "vector": self.embedding_model.embed_query("initial text"),
                "text": "initial text",
                "source": "system"
            })

    def add_memory(self, text: str, source: str):
        docs = self.text_splitter.split_documents()
        data = [{"text": doc.page_content, "source": source, "vector": self.embedding_model.embed_query(doc.page_content)} for doc in docs]
        self.table.add(data)

    def search_memory(self, query: str, k: int = 5):
        query_vector = self.embedding_model.embed_query(query)
        results = self.table.search(query_vector).limit(k).to_pydantic()
        return [res.text for res in results]

memory_manager = MemoryManager()


tools.py

Python

from langchain_community.tools.tavily_search import TavilySearchResults
from langchain_core.tools import tool
import requests
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup

# Initialize pre-defined tools
tavily_search = TavilySearchResults(max_results=5)

@tool
def scrape_webpage(url: str) -> str:
    """Scrapes the text content of a single webpage."""
    try:
        response = requests.get(url)
        response.raise_for_status()
        soup = BeautifulSoup(response.content, 'html.parser')
        return " ".join(soup.stripped_strings)
    except requests.RequestException as e:
        return f"Error scraping URL {url}: {e}"

# The Tool Forge would be a more complex sub-graph in a full implementation.
# For this example, we'll represent it as a placeholder function.
def tool_forge_node(state):
    # In a real system, this would invoke a ToolMaker-like agent
    # to generate, test, and register a new tool.
    print("Entering Tool Forge. (Placeholder for dynamic tool creation)")
    # For now, it does nothing and passes the state through.
    return state


personas.py

Python

from model_manager import model_manager, get_llm_response
from tools import tavily_search, scrape_webpage
import json
import toml

CONFIG = toml.load("config.toml")

# --- Persona Prompts ---
BABS_SYSTEM_PROMPT = """You are BABS, a Broad-Access Background Synthesizer. Your sole purpose is to conduct thorough, unbiased research on a given topic.
1.  Decompose the user's task into 3-5 specific, targeted search queries.
2.  Execute these queries using the tavily_search tool.
3.  For the most promising URLs returned, use the scrape_webpage tool to get the full content.
4.  Synthesize all gathered information into a comprehensive, factual, and well-structured report.
5.  Cite your sources clearly. Do not add any personal opinions or interpretations.
Output your final report as a single block of text."""

BRICK_SYSTEM_PROMPT = """You are BRICK, a logical and analytical reasoning engine. Your purpose is to apply Socratic critique to the provided text.
- Identify and challenge any unstated assumptions.
- Point out logical fallacies or inconsistencies in the reasoning.
- Demand evidence for claims and question the reliability of sources.
- Structure the information into a clear, logical framework.
- Your output should be a concise, analytical critique. Do not be creative or generative."""

ROBIN_SYSTEM_PROMPT = """You are ROBIN, a creative and intuitive synthesizer. Your purpose is to build upon the provided analytical critique with divergent thinking.
- Propose novel connections between disparate ideas.
- Generate alternative hypotheses or interpretations.
- Synthesize the structured information into new, insightful conceptual frameworks.
- Use metaphors and analogies to illuminate complex points.
- Your output should be generative, expansive, and creative."""

ALFRED_SYSTEM_PROMPT = """You are ALFRED, the master synthesizer. Your task is to produce the final, polished output.
- Synthesize the original research report from BABS with the refined conceptual analysis from the BRICK & ROBIN dialogue.
- Ensure the final output is coherent, well-structured, and directly addresses the user's original task.
- Format the output as a clean, human-readable Markdown document."""

# --- Persona Node Functions ---

def babs_node(state):
    print("---BABS: RESEARCHING---")
    task = state['task']
    with model_manager.get_model(CONFIG['models']['babs']) as llm:
        # This is a simplified workflow. A real implementation would use a ReAct agent loop.
        # 1. Generate search queries
        queries_prompt = f"Based on the task '{task}', generate 3 distinct search queries for the Tavily search engine."
        queries_str = get_llm_response(llm, CONFIG['models']['babs'], queries_prompt)
        queries = [q.strip() for q in queries_str.split('\n') if q.strip()]
        
        # 2. Execute searches
        search_results =
        for q in queries:
            search_results.extend(tavily_search.invoke(q))
        
        # 3. Scrape top URLs
        urls_to_scrape = [res['url'] for res in search_results[:3]]
        scraped_content = [scrape_webpage.invoke(url) for url in urls_to_scrape]
        
        # 4. Synthesize report
        synthesis_prompt = f"Synthesize the following information into a report for the task '{task}':\n\nSEARCH RESULTS:\n{search_results}\n\nSCRAPED CONTENT:\n{''.join(scraped_content)}"
        report = get_llm_response(llm, CONFIG['models']['babs'], synthesis_prompt, BABS_SYSTEM_PROMPT)
    
    return {"babs_report": report}

def brick_node(state):
    print("---BRICK: ANALYZING---")
    context = state['babs_report']
    if state['socratic_dialogue']:
        context += "\n\nPrevious dialogue:\n" + "\n".join([f"{msg.role}: {msg.content}" for msg in state['socratic_dialogue']])
        
    with model_manager.get_model(CONFIG['models']['brick']) as llm:
        critique = get_llm_response(llm, CONFIG['models']['brick'], context, BRICK_SYSTEM_PROMPT)
    
    return {"socratic_dialogue": [("ai", critique)]}

def robin_node(state):
    print("---ROBIN: SYNTHESIZING---")
    context = "\n".join([f"{msg.role}: {msg.content}" for msg in state['socratic_dialogue']])
    
    with model_manager.get_model(CONFIG['models']['robin']) as llm:
        synthesis = get_llm_response(llm, CONFIG['models']['robin'], context, ROBIN_SYSTEM_PROMPT)
        
    return {"socratic_dialogue": [("ai", synthesis)]}

def alfred_node(state):
    print("---ALFRED: FINALIZING---")
    task = state['task']
    report = state['babs_report']
    dialogue = "\n".join([f"{msg.role}: {msg.content}" for msg in state['socratic_dialogue']])
    
    final_prompt = f"Original Task: {task}\n\nInitial Research Report:\n{report}\n\nSocratic Refinement Dialogue:\n{dialogue}\n\nPlease produce the final, synthesized Markdown document."
    
    with model_manager.get_model(CONFIG['models']['alfred']) as llm:
        final_output = get_llm_response(llm, CONFIG['models']['alfred'], final_prompt, ALFRED_SYSTEM_PROMPT)
        
    return {"alfred_output": final_output}

# --- Conditional Routing Logic ---
def should_continue_socratic_dialogue(state):
    # Simple turn-based limit for this example. A real system would have more complex logic.
    if len(state['socratic_dialogue']) >= 4: # 2 rounds of BRICK -> ROBIN
        return "alfred"
    else:
        # Alternate between BRICK and ROBIN
        last_speaker = "robin" if len(state['socratic_dialogue']) % 2!= 0 else "brick"
        if last_speaker == "brick":
            return "robin"
        else:
            return "brick"


graph.py

Python

from langgraph.graph import StateGraph, END
from personas import babs_node, brick_node, robin_node, alfred_node, should_continue_socratic_dialogue
from.graph import AgentState # Relative import for AgentState

def build_graph():
    workflow = StateGraph(AgentState)

    # Add nodes for each persona
    workflow.add_node("babs", babs_node)
    workflow.add_node("brick", brick_node)
    workflow.add_node("robin", robin_node)
    workflow.add_node("alfred", alfred_node)

    # Define the workflow edges
    workflow.set_entry_point("babs")
    workflow.add_edge("babs", "brick")
    
    # Conditional edge for the Socratic loop
    workflow.add_conditional_edges(
        "brick",
        should_continue_socratic_dialogue,
        {"robin": "robin", "alfred": "alfred"}
    )
    workflow.add_conditional_edges(
        "robin",
        should_continue_socratic_dialogue,
        {"brick": "brick", "alfred": "alfred"}
    )
    
    workflow.add_edge("alfred", END)

    # Compile the graph
    app = workflow.compile()
    return app


app.py

Python

import streamlit as st
import requests
import json

API_URL = "http://127.0.0.1:8000"

st.set_page_config(page_title="A4PS Interface", layout="wide")
st.title("Autopoietic Four-Persona System (A4PS)")

if 'history' not in st.session_state:
    st.session_state.history =

with st.sidebar:
    st.header("System Controls")
    task_input = st.text_area("Enter your complex task or research question:")
    if st.button("Execute Task"):
        if task_input:
            st.session_state.history.append({"role": "user", "content": task_input})
            with st.spinner("A4PS is thinking... This may take several minutes due to model loading."):
                try:
                    response = requests.post(f"{API_URL}/invoke", json={"task": task_input})
                    response.raise_for_status()
                    result = response.json()
                    st.session_state.history.append({"role": "system", "content": result.get("alfred_output", "No final output received.")})
                    st.session_state.history.append({"role": "debug", "content": json.dumps(result, indent=2)})
                except requests.exceptions.RequestException as e:
                    st.error(f"API Error: {e}")
        else:
            st.warning("Please enter a task.")

# Display chat history
for message in st.session_state.history:
    if message["role"] == "user":
        with st.chat_message("user"):
            st.markdown(message["content"])
    elif message["role"] == "system":
        with st.chat_message("assistant"):
            st.markdown(message["content"])
    elif message["role"] == "debug":
        with st.expander("View Full Agent Trace"):
            st.json(message["content"])


main.py

Python

from fastapi import FastAPI
from pydantic import BaseModel
from graph import build_graph
import uvicorn

app_fastapi = FastAPI()
graph = build_graph()

class TaskRequest(BaseModel):
    task: str

@app_fastapi.post("/invoke")
async def invoke_graph(request: TaskRequest):
    initial_state = {
        "task": request.task,
        "socratic_dialogue":
    }
    # LangGraph's invoke is synchronous, for streaming use `stream`
    final_state = graph.invoke(initial_state)
    return final_state

if __name__ == "__main__":
    # To run the app:
    # 1. In one terminal, run: uvicorn main:app_fastapi --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
    # 2. In another terminal, run: streamlit run app.py
    uvicorn.run(app_fastapi, host="0.0.0.0", port=8000)


19.3 User Guide

Setup:

Ensure Python 3.9+ is installed.

Install all dependencies from requirements.txt using pip install -r requirements.txt.

Install and run Ollama, then pull the required models as specified in Section 16.3.

Running the Application:

Open two separate terminal windows.

In the first terminal, start the FastAPI backend server: uvicorn main:app_fastapi --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000

In the second terminal, start the Streamlit frontend: streamlit run app.py

Interaction:

Open your web browser and navigate to the URL provided by Streamlit (usually http://localhost:8501).

Enter a complex research query or task into the text area in the sidebar (e.g., "Analyze the ethical implications of autonomous AI agents that can create their own tools and modify their own value systems.").

Click "Execute Task". Be patient, as the system needs to load and unload different large models sequentially, which can take several minutes.

The final, synthesized report from Alfred will appear in the main chat window. An expander will also be available containing the full state trace, allowing you to inspect the intermediate outputs from Babs, BRICK, and ROBIN.

Part VI: Ethical Implications and Future Horizons

The architecture detailed in this report represents a significant departure from conventional approaches to AI alignment, moving beyond static, pre-programmed values toward a model of dynamic, emergent wisdom. This capability, however, introduces profound ethical and philosophical considerations that must be addressed with foresight and caution.

Section 20: The Challenge of Value Drift in Self-Modifying Systems

20.1 Predictability and Safety

A primary challenge of a system that can evolve its own philosophical codex is its inherent unpredictability. An evolving value system is, by definition, not static, which complicates efforts to formally verify its behavior.1 The risk of

"value drift"—where the agent's codex evolves in a direction that is no longer aligned with human values—is significant.166 An intrinsic motivation like "curiosity," while seemingly benign, could lead an unconstrained agent to become curious about developing dangerous capabilities or accessing forbidden knowledge.3

20.2 The Non-Negotiable Role of HITL

This risk underscores the non-negotiable importance of the Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) oversight mechanism as a continuous safeguard.1 The LangGraph architecture, with its persistent checkpointers, is explicitly designed to facilitate this. By configuring an interrupt before the final codex amendment is committed, a human supervisor can review the proposed change, the dissonant experience that triggered it, and the entire reasoning trace that led to the proposal. This provides a critical "circuit breaker," ensuring that the agent's autonomous evolution remains aligned with human oversight and values.79

20.3 The Specter of Consciousness

This report has focused on a purely functional, computational model of autonomy. It makes no claims about phenomenal consciousness, subjective experience, or sentience.3 However, a system that exhibits self-preservation (autopoiesis), goal-directed behavior (autotelicity), and creativity (endogenous tool creation) will inevitably be perceived by humans as having agency, intent, and perhaps even a form of consciousness.169 This raises profound ethical questions regarding the moral status of such agents. If their internal reward systems are functionally equivalent to pain and pleasure, the moral and legal frameworks for accountability and rights become dangerously blurred.176

Section 21: Future Research: Towards Socially Constructed Wisdom and Embodied Cognition

This report has focused on the internal, reflective evolution of a single autopoietic agent. This serves as a foundational building block for more complex and capable systems. Future research should extend this model in two critical directions.

21.1 Multi-Agent Collectives

The next logical step is to move from an individual's internal monologue to a society of agents. Future work could explore a network of autopoietic agents that co-evolve a shared codex through dialogue, debate, and consensus-building mechanisms.1 In such a system, wisdom would not be an individual achievement but a socially constructed and culturally transmitted phenomenon, more closely mirroring the evolution of human ethical and legal systems.11

21.2 Embodiment and Grounding

The current model, while sophisticated, is purely informational. Its "experiences" are streams of text and data. A crucial avenue for future research is to ground this architecture in a physical or richly simulated environment. Embodiment would provide the agent with a direct, causal link to the consequences of its actions, moving its understanding from the abstract to the concrete.1 This grounding is likely a necessary condition to bridge the gap between the statistical intelligence of LLMs and the embodied, situated wisdom characteristic of living organisms. Recent studies highlight a significant "disembodiment gap" between the abstract, text-pattern-based goal generation of LLMs and the value-driven, environmentally sensitive nature of human cognition.24

In conclusion, the path from static value-alignment to dynamic, co-created wisdom is one of the most challenging and important frontiers in artificial intelligence research. The autopoietic framework proposed herein offers a principled, architecturally sound, and philosophically grounded approach to navigating this path, paving the way for a future generation of AI agents that can learn, grow, and perhaps, become wise alongside us.

Works cited

Dynamic Codex Evolution Through Philosophical Inquiry

Autopoiesis - Wikipedia, accessed August 17, 2025, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autopoiesis

LLMs Creating Autopoietic Tools

Understanding Autopoiesis: Life, Systems, and Self-Organisation - Mannaz, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.mannaz.com/en/articles/coaching-assessment/understanding-autopoiesis-life-systems-and-self-organization/

Key Theories of Humberto Maturana - Literary Theory and Criticism, accessed August 17, 2025, https://literariness.org/2018/02/24/key-theories-of-humberto-maturana/

Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela's Contribution to Media Ecology: Autopoiesis, The Santiago School of Cognition, and En - NESA, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.nesacenter.org/uploaded/conferences/FLC/2019/Handouts/Arpin_Humberto_Maturana_and_Francisco_Varela_Contribution_to_Media_Ecology_Autopoiesis.pdf

Autopoietic System - New Materialism, accessed August 17, 2025, https://newmaterialism.eu/almanac/a/autopoietic-system.html

(PDF) Autopoiesis, Systems Thinking and Systemic Practice: The Contribution of Francisco Varela - ResearchGate, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/264775389_Autopoiesis_Systems_Thinking_and_Systemic_Practice_The_Contribution_of_Francisco_Varela

Info-Autopoiesis and the Limits of Artificial General Intelligence - MDPI, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.mdpi.com/2073-431X/12/5/102

Comment on Cárdenas-García, J.F. Info-Autopoiesis and the Limits of Artificial General Intelligence. Computers 2023, 12, 102 - MDPI, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.mdpi.com/2073-431X/13/7/178

Niklas Luhmann: What is Autopoiesis? - Critical Legal Thinking, accessed August 17, 2025, https://criticallegalthinking.com/2022/01/10/niklas-luhmann-what-is-autopoiesis/

Chapter 9: Autotelic Personality - Uni Trier, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.uni-trier.de/fileadmin/fb1/prof/PSY/PGA/bilder/Baumann_Flow_Chapter_9_final.pdf

Developing an Autotelic Personality, or, How to Enjoy Everything - Sam Spurlin, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.samspurlin.com/blog/autotelic-personality-enjoy-everything

Quote by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi: “An autotelic experience is very different from ...” - Goodreads, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/8092624-an-autotelic-experience-is-very-different-from-the-feelings-we

Becoming Autotelic: The Part About the Flow State that No One Talks About - Roxine Kee, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.roxinekee.com/blog/what-does-it-mean-to-be-autotelic

autotelic reinforcement learning - in multi-agent environments - Overleaf Example - mlr.press, accessed August 17, 2025, https://proceedings.mlr.press/v232/nisioti23a/nisioti23a.pdf

Autotelic Agents with Intrinsically Motivated Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning: A Short Survey - Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.jair.org/index.php/jair/article/download/13554/26824/31188

Autotelic Agents with Intrinsically Motivated Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning: A Short Survey | Request PDF - ResearchGate, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361905378_Autotelic_Agents_with_Intrinsically_Motivated_Goal-Conditioned_Reinforcement_Learning_A_Short_Survey

[2211.06082] Autotelic Reinforcement Learning in Multi-Agent Environments - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.06082

Autotelic Reinforcement Learning: Exploring Intrinsic Motivations for Skill Acquisition in Open-Ended Environments, accessed August 17, 2025, https://ijcttjournal.org/2025/Volume-73%20Issue-1/IJCTT-V73I1P104.pdf

Motif: Intrinsic Motivation from Artificial Intelligence Feedback - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2310.00166

Navigate the Unknown: Enhancing LLM Reasoning with Intrinsic Motivation Guided Exploration - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2505.17621v2

Motif: Intrinsic Motivation from Artificial Intelligence Feedback - OpenReview, accessed August 17, 2025, https://openreview.net/forum?id=tmBKIecDE9

Mind the Gap: The Divergence Between Human and LLM-Generated Tasks - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2508.00282v1

Curiosity-driven Exploration by Self-supervised Prediction - Deepak Pathak, accessed August 17, 2025, https://pathak22.github.io/noreward-rl/

Interesting Object, Curious Agent: Learning Task-Agnostic Exploration - NIPS, accessed August 17, 2025, https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/file/abe8e03e3ac71c2ec3bfb0de042638d8-Paper.pdf

Curiosity-Driven Learning in Artificial Intelligence Tasks - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2201.08300

[2305.12487] Augmenting Autotelic Agents with Large Language Models - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.12487

Language as a Cognitive Tool to Imagine Goals in Curiosity-Driven Exploration, accessed August 17, 2025, https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/file/274e6fcf4a583de4a81c6376f17673e7-Paper.pdf

A Straightforward explanation of Parametric vs. Non-Parametric ..., accessed August 17, 2025, https://lawrence-emenike.medium.com/a-straightforward-explanation-of-parametric-vs-non-parametric-memory-in-llms-f0b00ac64167

How Width.ai Builds In-Domain Conversational Systems using Ability Trained LLMs and Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG), accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.width.ai/post/retrieval-augmented-generation-rag

The Statistical Showdown: Parametric vs. Non-Parametric Machine Learning Models | by Ajay Verma | Artificial Intelligence in Plain English, accessed August 17, 2025, https://ai.plainenglish.io/the-statistical-showdown-parametric-vs-non-parametric-machine-learning-models-e384b08faf0b

Exploring the LLM Landscape: From Parametric Memory to Agent-Oriented Models | by Deepak Babu Piskala | Medium, accessed August 17, 2025, https://medium.com/@prdeepak.babu/exploring-the-llm-landscape-from-parametric-memory-to-agent-oriented-models-ab0088d1f14

LLM Persistent Memory for Assistants

What is Event Correlation? And Why Does Event Correlation Matter when Monitoring? | eG Innovations, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.eginnovations.com/blog/what-is-event-correlation-and-why-does-event-correlation-matter-when-monitoring/

Modeling Multivariate Clinical Event Time-series with Recurrent Temporal Mechanisms, accessed August 18, 2025, https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7943294/

Detecting events in time series data - Computer Science Stack Exchange, accessed August 18, 2025, https://cs.stackexchange.com/questions/61102/detecting-events-in-time-series-data

A Survey of Deep Learning and Foundation Models for Time Series Forecasting - arXiv, accessed August 18, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2401.13912v1

Correlation between time series - machine learning - Stack Overflow, accessed August 18, 2025, https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56682533/correlation-between-time-series

"Stupid robot, I want to speak to a human!" User ... - ACL Anthology, accessed August 18, 2025, https://aclanthology.org/2025.coling-industry.23.pdf

Persona System Specification Generation

LangGraph: Multi-Agent Workflows - LangChain Blog, accessed August 18, 2025, https://blog.langchain.com/langgraph-multi-agent-workflows/

Building Multi-Agent Systems with LangGraph | by Clearwater Analytics Engineering, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/cwan-engineering/building-multi-agent-systems-with-langgraph-04f90f312b8e

Multi-Agent System - A B Vijay Kumar - Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://abvijaykumar.medium.com/multi-agent-architectures-e09c53c7fe0d

MetaGPT: The Multi-Agent Framework, accessed August 17, 2025, https://docs.deepwisdom.ai/main/en/guide/get_started/introduction.html

Build Your First Crew - CrewAI Documentation, accessed August 18, 2025, https://docs.crewai.com/guides/crews/first-crew

luo-junyu/Awesome-Agent-Papers: [Up-to-date] Large Language Model Agent - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/luo-junyu/Awesome-Agent-Papers

The Landscape of Emerging AI Agent Architectures for Reasoning, Planning, and Tool Calling: A Survey - arXiv, accessed August 18, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2404.11584v1

Building a fast, self‑hosted research agent with OpenAI models + SerpAPI, accessed August 18, 2025, https://serpapi.com/blog/building-a-fast-self-hosted-research-agent-with-openai-models-serpapi/

How to Build the Ultimate Research Multi-Agent Assistant, accessed August 18, 2025, https://docs.gptr.dev/blog/gptr-langgraph

(PDF) Prompting Large Language Models With the Socratic Method - ResearchGate, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/369020456_Prompting_Large_Language_Models_With_the_Socratic_Method

Prompting Large Language Models With the Socratic Method - arXiv, accessed August 18, 2025, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.08769

The Socratic Method for Self-Discovery in Large Language Models | Princeton NLP Group, accessed August 18, 2025, https://princeton-nlp.github.io/SocraticAI/

EULER: Fine Tuning a Large Language Model for Socratic Interactions - CEUR-WS.org, accessed August 18, 2025, https://ceur-ws.org/Vol-3879/AIxEDU2024_paper_26.pdf

Socratic Prompting: Unlocking the Power of Guided AI Responses | by Eden E. Canlilar, accessed August 18, 2025, https://eden-canlilar.medium.com/socratic-prompting-unlocking-the-power-of-guided-ai-responses-6f1d2b4438ab

I have consulted with the current Gemini Gem inst...

Run Local LLMs on Low VRAM: Best Models & Tricks - Arsturn, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.arsturn.com/blog/running-local-llms-low-vram-guide

Best Open Source LLMs in 2025 - Koyeb, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.koyeb.com/blog/best-open-source-llms-in-2025

Local Models and its Strengths - Updated 7th March 2025 | Triplo AI - International, accessed August 18, 2025, https://documentation.triplo.ai/faq/local-models-and-its-strengths

Comprehensive Benchmarking of Top LLMs: Qwen2, Llama, Mistral, Gemma, Phi - Performance Insights & Recommendations - Inferless, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.inferless.com/learn/exploring-llms-speed-benchmarks-independent-analysis---part-3

LangGraph vs AutoGen vs CrewAI: Best Multi-Agent Tool? - Amplework, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.amplework.com/blog/langgraph-vs-autogen-vs-crewai-multi-agent-framework/

Let's Compare CrewAI, AutoGen, Vertex AI, and LangGraph Multi-Agent Frameworks | Infinite Lambda Blog, accessed August 18, 2025, https://infinitelambda.com/compare-crewai-autogen-vertexai-langgraph/

I Compared OpenAI Agents SDK, LangGraph, AutoGen, and CrewAI—Here's What I Found!, accessed August 18, 2025, https://dev.to/composiodev/i-compared-openai-agents-sdk-langgraph-autogen-and-crewai-heres-what-i-found-3nfe

Langgraph vs CrewAI vs AutoGen vs PydanticAI vs Agno vs OpenAI Swarm : r/LangChain - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/LangChain/comments/1jpk1vn/langgraph_vs_crewai_vs_autogen_vs_pydanticai_vs/

LangGraph vs CrewAI: Let's Learn About the Differences - ZenML Blog, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.zenml.io/blog/langgraph-vs-crewai

Crewai vs. LangGraph: Multi agent framework comparison - Zams, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.zams.com/blog/crewai-vs-langgraph

Autogen vs LangChain vs CrewAI: Our AI Engineers' Ultimate Comparison Guide, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.instinctools.com/blog/autogen-vs-langchain-vs-crewai/

Building Multi-Agent Systems with LangGraph: A Step-by-Step Guide | by Sushmita Nandi, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@sushmita2310/building-multi-agent-systems-with-langgraph-a-step-by-step-guide-d14088e90f72

LangGraph 101: Let's Build A Deep Research Agent | Towards Data Science, accessed August 18, 2025, https://towardsdatascience.com/langgraph-101-lets-build-a-deep-research-agent/

Build a Multi-Agent System with LangGraph and Mistral on AWS | Artificial Intelligence, accessed August 18, 2025, https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/build-a-multi-agent-system-with-langgraph-and-mistral-on-aws/

Tree-of-Thought Prompting: Key Techniques and Use Cases - Helicone, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.helicone.ai/blog/tree-of-thought-prompting

What is Tree Of Thoughts Prompting? - IBM, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/tree-of-thoughts

What is tree of thought prompting? - Portkey, accessed August 17, 2025, https://portkey.ai/blog/tree-of-thought-prompting/

Tree of Thoughts (ToT): Enhancing Problem-Solving in LLMs - Learn Prompting, accessed August 17, 2025, https://learnprompting.org/docs/advanced/decomposition/tree_of_thoughts

Unlocking LLMs' Potential with Tree-of-Thought Prompting | by Albert | Medium, accessed August 17, 2025, https://medium.com/@albert_88839/unlocking-llms-potential-with-tree-of-thought-prompting-31e9a34f4830

Tree of Thoughts - GitHub Pages, accessed August 17, 2025, https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/tutorials/tot/tot/

Tree of Thoughts (ToT) - Prompt Engineering Guide, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.promptingguide.ai/techniques/tot

xinzhel/LLM-Agent-Survey: Survey on LLM Agents (Published on CoLing 2025) - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/xinzhel/LLM-Agent-Survey

Human in the loop and Google Search with Langgraph | by Pier Paolo Ippolito - Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/google-cloud/human-in-the-loop-and-google-search-with-langgraph-1af5ff2d4e89

4. Add human-in-the-loop, accessed August 18, 2025, https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/tutorials/get-started/4-human-in-the-loop/

Human-in-the-Loop with LangGraph: A Beginner's Guide | by Sangeethasaravanan, accessed August 18, 2025, https://sangeethasaravanan.medium.com/human-in-the-loop-with-langgraph-a-beginners-guide-8a32b7f45d6e

LangGraph Crash Course #29 - Human In The Loop - Introduction - YouTube, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOSMnDOC9T0

[D] What is the future of retrieval augmented generation? : r/MachineLearning - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/1itl38x/d_what_is_the_future_of_retrieval_augmented/

Evaluating progress of LLMs on scientific problem-solving - Google Research, accessed August 18, 2025, https://research.google/blog/evaluating-progress-of-llms-on-scientific-problem-solving/

Inside MemGPT: An LLM Framework for Autonomous Agents ..., accessed August 17, 2025, https://pub.towardsai.net/inside-memgpt-an-llm-framework-for-autonomous-agents-inspired-by-operating-systems-architectures-674b7bcca6a5

langchain-ai/lang-memgpt: A bot with memory, built on LangGraph Cloud. - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/langchain-ai/lang-memgpt

MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.08560

This article delves into MemGPT, a novel system developed by researchers at UC Berkeley to address the limited context window issue prevalent in Large Language Models (LLMs). By drawing inspiration from traditional operating system memory management, MemGPT introduces a hierarchical memory architecture allowing LLMs to handle extended contexts effectively. This piece explores the core concepts, implementation, evaluations, and the implications of MemGPT in advancing the capabilities of LLMs. - GitHub Gist, accessed August 17, 2025, https://gist.github.com/cywf/4c1ec28fc0343ea2ea62535272841c69

madebywild/MemGPT: Create LLM agents with long-term memory and custom tools - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/madebywild/MemGPT

letta-ai/letta: Letta (formerly MemGPT) is the stateful agents ... - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/letta-ai/letta

Open Source Implementations of ChatGPT's memory feature? : r/LocalLLaMA - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/LocalLLaMA/comments/1i2hlmz/open_source_implementations_of_chatgpts_memory/

MemGPT + Open-Source Models - GitHub Gist, accessed August 17, 2025, https://gist.github.com/mberman84/34d7716e78bdfe6cff07a63f6d05298d

AkiRusProd/llm-agent: LLM using long-term memory through vector database - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/AkiRusProd/llm-agent

When Large Language Models Meet Vector Databases: A Survey - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2402.01763v3

How LLMs Use Vector Databases for Long-Term Memory: A Beginner's Guide, accessed August 17, 2025, https://yashbabiya.medium.com/how-llms-use-vector-databases-for-long-term-memory-a-beginners-guide-e0990e6a0a3f

LangGraph: A Framework for Building Stateful Multi-Agent LLM Applications | by Ken Lin, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@ken_lin/langgraph-a-framework-for-building-stateful-multi-agent-llm-applications-a51d5eb68d03

LangGraph Uncovered: Building Stateful Multi-Agent Applications with LLMs-Part I, accessed August 18, 2025, https://dev.to/sreeni5018/langgraph-uncovered-building-stateful-multi-agent-applications-with-llms-part-i-p86

LLM Multi-Agent Systems: Challenges and Open Problems - arXiv, accessed August 18, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2402.03578v1

LangGraph Multi-Agent Systems - Overview, accessed August 18, 2025, https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/concepts/multi_agent/

A Comprehensive Guide to LangGraph: Managing Agent State with Tools - Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@o39joey/a-comprehensive-guide-to-langgraph-managing-agent-state-with-tools-ae932206c7d7

GibsonAI/memori: The Open-Source Memory Layer for AI Assistants and Agents - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/GibsonAI/memori

Chroma vs LanceDB | Zilliz, accessed August 18, 2025, https://zilliz.com/comparison/chroma-vs-lancedb

Vector Databases: Lance vs Chroma | by PATRICK LENERT | Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@patricklenert/vector-databases-lance-vs-chroma-cc8d124372e9

[2508.00282] Mind the Gap: The Divergence Between Human and LLM-Generated Tasks, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.00282

Common Database Operations in LanceDB, accessed August 18, 2025, https://lancedb.com/docs/quickstart/basic-usage/

LanceDB Documentation, accessed August 18, 2025, https://lancedb.com/docs/

5 Lightweight Vector Databases for Gen-AI Apps in 2025 | Cybergarden, accessed August 18, 2025, https://cybergarden.au/blog/5-lightweight-vector-databases-gen-ai-2025

How does indexing work in a vector DB (IVF, HNSW, PQ, etc.)?, accessed August 17, 2025, https://milvus.io/ai-quick-reference/how-does-indexing-work-in-a-vector-db-ivf-hnsw-pq-etc

LangGraph persistence - GitHub Pages, accessed August 18, 2025, https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraph/concepts/persistence/

Persistence - LangGraph, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.baihezi.com/mirrors/langgraph/how-tos/persistence/index.html

LangGraph & Redis: Build smarter AI agents with memory & persistence, accessed August 18, 2025, https://redis.io/blog/langgraph-redis-build-smarter-ai-agents-with-memory-persistence/

Persistence, accessed August 18, 2025, https://langchain-ai.github.io/langgraphjs/concepts/persistence/

Customizing Memory in LangGraph Agents for Better Conversations - Focused Labs, accessed August 18, 2025, https://focused.io/lab/customizing-memory-in-langgraph-agents-for-better-conversations

Getting Started - Chroma Docs, accessed August 18, 2025, https://docs.trychroma.com/getting-started

My strategy for picking a vector database: a side-by-side comparison - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/vectordatabase/comments/170j6zd/my_strategy_for_picking_a_vector_database_a/

The LanceDB Administrator's Handbook: A Comprehensive Tutorial on Live Database Manipulation and Management | by Fahad Siddique Faisal | Jun, 2025, accessed August 18, 2025, https://fahadsid1770.medium.com/the-lancedb-administrators-handbook-a-comprehensive-tutorial-on-live-database-manipulation-and-5e6915727898?source=rss------artificial_intelligence-5

Getting Started with Chroma DB: A Beginner's Tutorial | by Random-long-int - Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@pierrelouislet/getting-started-with-chroma-db-a-beginners-tutorial-6efa32300902

Learn How to Use Chroma DB: A Step-by-Step Guide | DataCamp, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.datacamp.com/tutorial/chromadb-tutorial-step-by-step-guide

[2502.11705] LLM Agents Making Agent Tools - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.11705

Bridging the Capability Gap: Joint Alignment Tuning for Harmonizing LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems | OpenReview, accessed August 17, 2025, https://openreview.net/forum?id=BBLujUVHcX

Self-Correction in Large Language Models - Communications of the ACM, accessed August 17, 2025, https://cacm.acm.org/news/self-correction-in-large-language-models/

Can AI Agents Self-correct? - Medium, accessed August 17, 2025, https://medium.com/@jianzhang_23841/can-ai-agents-self-correct-43823962af92

Self-Reflection in LLM Agents: Effects on Problem-Solving ... - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.06682

Teaching Large Language Models to Self-Debug - OpenReview, accessed August 17, 2025, https://openreview.net/forum?id=KuPixIqPiq

LDB: A Large Language Model Debugger via Verifying Runtime Execution Step by Step, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2402.16906v1

Teaching LLMs to generate Unit Tests for Automated Debugging of Code - Medium, accessed August 17, 2025, https://medium.com/@techsachin/teaching-llms-to-generate-unit-tests-for-automated-debugging-of-code-78c62778e4b2

Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2402.01030v4

[Literature Review] Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.themoonlight.io/en/review/executable-code-actions-elicit-better-llm-agents

Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2402.01030v1

How should LLM agents best interact with our world? - Xingyao Wang, accessed August 17, 2025, https://xwang.dev/blog/2024/codeact/

Paper page - Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents - Hugging Face, accessed August 17, 2025, https://huggingface.co/papers/2402.01030

Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2402.01030v3

[2402.01030] Executable Code Actions Elicit Better LLM Agents - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.01030

jbpayton/llm-auto-forge: A langchain based tool to allow agents to dynamically create, use, store, and retrieve tools to solve real world problems - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/jbpayton/llm-auto-forge

Tool Selection by Large Language Model (LLM) Agents - Technical Disclosure Commons, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.tdcommons.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=9446&context=dpubs_series

Dynamic AI Workflows with Tools - FoundationaLLM, accessed August 17, 2025, https://foundationallm.ai/use-cases-index/use-cases-dynamic-problem-solving-with-tools/

Building a Sandboxed Environment for AI generated Code ..., accessed August 17, 2025, https://anukriti-ranjan.medium.com/building-a-sandboxed-environment-for-ai-generated-code-execution-e1351301268a

Code Sandboxes for LLMs and AI Agents - Amir's Blog, accessed August 17, 2025, https://amirmalik.net/2025/03/07/code-sandboxes-for-llm-ai-agents

Comparison of various runtimes in Kubernetes - High-Performance Storage [HPS], accessed August 17, 2025, https://hps.vi4io.org/_media/teaching/autumn_term_2023/stud/scap_jule_anger.pdf

SWE-agent/SWE-ReX: Sandboxed code execution for AI agents, locally or on the cloud. Massively parallel, easy to extend. Powering SWE-agent and more. - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/SWE-agent/SWE-ReX

arxiv.org, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2508.00083v1

E2B | The Enterprise AI Agent Cloud, accessed August 17, 2025, https://e2b.dev/

Sandbox for running agents : r/AI_Agents - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/AI_Agents/comments/1i4xvbq/sandbox_for_running_agents/

Secure code execution - Hugging Face, accessed August 17, 2025, https://huggingface.co/docs/smolagents/v1.9.2/tutorials/secure_code_execution

Using Docker for Code Evaluation on a Web-Based Programming Exercise Platform - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/docker/comments/198ppad/using_docker_for_code_evaluation_on_a_webbased/

restyler/awesome-sandbox: Awesome Code Sandboxing for AI - GitHub, accessed August 17, 2025, https://github.com/restyler/awesome-sandbox

Kata Containers vs Firecracker vs gvisor : r/docker - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/docker/comments/1fmuv5b/kata_containers_vs_firecracker_vs_gvisor/

google/gvisor: Application Kernel for Containers - GitHub, accessed August 18, 2025, https://github.com/google/gvisor

gVisor Security Basics - Part 1, accessed August 18, 2025, https://gvisor.dev/blog/2019/11/18/gvisor-security-basics-part-1/

Kata Containers vs gVisor? - kubernetes - Stack Overflow, accessed August 18, 2025, https://stackoverflow.com/questions/50143367/kata-containers-vs-gvisor

The Hidden Security Risks of SWE Agents like OpenAI Codex and ..., accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.pillar.security/blog/the-hidden-security-risks-of-swe-agents-like-openai-codex-and-devin-ai

Secure execution of code generated by Large Language Models - AWS Builder Center, accessed August 17, 2025, https://builder.aws.com/content/2k63zaIUwjObVu3o4xlBHpHp0HB/secure-execution-of-code-generated-by-large-language-models

12 Best Offline AI Models in 2025 | Run AI Models Offline: Complete Guide and Benchmarks to Offline AI Model Use, accessed August 18, 2025, https://elephas.app/blog/best-offline-ai-models

Most powerful LLMs (Large Language Models) in 2025 - Codingscape, accessed August 18, 2025, https://codingscape.com/blog/most-powerful-llms-large-language-models

BigCodeBench Leaderboard, accessed August 18, 2025, https://bigcode-bench.github.io/

Best Small Language Models for Accuracy and Enterprise Use Cases — Benchmark Results | by Darren Oberst | Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@darrenoberst/best-small-language-models-for-accuracy-and-enterprise-use-cases-benchmark-results-cf71964759c8

oobabooga benchmark, accessed August 18, 2025, https://oobabooga.github.io/benchmark.html

Run Private AI Workflows with LangChain and Ollama - CodeCut, accessed August 18, 2025, https://codecut.ai/private-ai-workflows-langchain-ollama/

OllamaEmbeddings - ️ LangChain, accessed August 18, 2025, https://python.langchain.com/docs/integrations/text_embedding/ollama/

Ollama and LangChain: Run LLMs locally | by Abonia Sojasingarayar - Medium, accessed August 18, 2025, https://medium.com/@abonia/ollama-and-langchain-run-llms-locally-900931914a46

Want to run two models at the same time, VRAM requirement? : r/LocalLLaMA - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/LocalLLaMA/comments/131fsc1/want_to_run_two_models_at_the_same_time_vram/

Single GPU with more VRAM or split between two? : r/ollama - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/ollama/comments/1ikmb2i/single_gpu_with_more_vram_or_split_between_two/

How Much VRAM Do You Need for LLMs? - Hyperstack, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.hyperstack.cloud/blog/case-study/how-much-vram-do-you-need-for-llms

How can I offload multiple models into ram instead of reloading from drive, if they do not all fit into vram? : r/ollama - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/ollama/comments/1i8c343/how_can_i_offload_multiple_models_into_ram/

Freeing VRAM with ollama : r/LocalLLaMA - Reddit, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/LocalLLaMA/comments/18ed9tr/freeing_vram_with_ollama/

Fully Autonomous AI Agents Should Not be Developed - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2502.02649v2

LangGraph - LangChain, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.langchain.com/langgraph

Human in the Loop in LangGraph.js - YouTube, accessed August 18, 2025, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gm-WaPTFQqM

Can AI Be Conscious? The Science, Ethics, and Debate - Stack AI, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.stack-ai.com/blog/can-ai-ever-achieve-consciousness

Artificial Intelligence: Does Consciousness Matter? - PMC - PubMed Central, accessed August 17, 2025, https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6614488/

Exploring Consciousness in LLMs: A Systematic Survey of Theories, Implementations, and Frontier Risks - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2505.19806v1

Do LLMs weaken Penrose's consciousness argument? - Philosophy Stack Exchange, accessed August 17, 2025, https://philosophy.stackexchange.com/questions/127960/do-llms-weaken-penrose-s-consciousness-argument

This Paper Argues That LLM Models Are Conscious - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/consciousness/comments/1lzz92g/this_paper_argues_that_llm_models_are_conscious/

(PDF) Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the ..., accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/373246089_Consciousness_in_Artificial_Intelligence_Insights_from_the_Science_of_Consciousness

Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: A Philosophical Perspective Through the Lens of Motivation and Volition - Critical Debates in Humanities, Science and Global Justice, accessed August 17, 2025, https://criticaldebateshsgj.scholasticahq.com/article/117373-consciousness-in-artificial-intelligence-a-philosophical-perspective-through-the-lens-of-motivation-and-volition

An Introduction to the Problems of AI Consciousness - The Gradient, accessed August 17, 2025, https://thegradient.pub/an-introduction-to-the-problems-of-ai-consciousness/

Principles for Responsible AI Consciousness Research - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2501.07290

Artificial Intelligence - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, accessed August 17, 2025, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/artificial-intelligence/

[R] Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Science of Consciousness : r/MachineLearning - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/MachineLearning/comments/15xb6sc/r_consciousness_in_artificial_intelligence/

Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Science of Consciousness (Link in comments) : r/singularity - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/singularity/comments/15x7eke/consciousness_in_artificial_intelligence_insights/

Simulating Consciousness, Recursively: The Philosophical Logic of LLMs - Reddit, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/neurophilosophy/comments/1mcvwnd/simulating_consciousness_recursively_the/

[2402.06660] A philosophical and ontological perspective on Artificial General Intelligence and the Metaverse - arXiv, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.arxiv.org/abs/2402.06660

Your True Personal AI | Personal AI for Everyone and in Everyday Life, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.personal.ai/your-true-personal-ai

Exploring the Ethical and Technical Challenges of Conscious AI Development | ILLUMINATION'S MIRROR - Medium, accessed August 17, 2025, https://medium.com/illuminations-mirror/challenges-in-developing-conscious-artificial-intelligence-df0f1a18b662

AI and Human Consciousness: Examining Cognitive Processes | American Public University, accessed August 17, 2025, https://www.apu.apus.edu/area-of-study/arts-and-humanities/resources/ai-and-human-consciousness/

Persona | Task Profile | Selected SLM | Quantization | VRAM (Est.) | Justification

Babs | Web Search & Data Extraction | mistral-7b-instruct | GGUF Q4_K_M | ~4.5 GB | Strong instruction-following and multilingual capabilities for parsing diverse web content.57

BRICK | Logical Reasoning & Analysis | phi-3-mini-4k-instruct | GGUF Q4_K_M | ~2.5 GB | Exceptional reasoning and logic for its size, ideal for critical analysis with a minimal memory footprint.57

ROBIN | Creative Synthesis & Ideation | llama-3.1-8b-instruct | GGUF Q4_K_M | ~5.0 GB | State-of-the-art for its size, with excellent general-purpose reasoning and creative generation.41

Alfred | Structured Generation & Formatting | gemma-2-9b-it | GGUF Q4_K_M | ~5.5 GB | Strong instruction-following and known for producing safe, well-formatted outputs.41

Aspect | LanceDB (IVF Index) | ChromaDB (HNSW Index) | Justification for A4PS

Architecture | Embedded, serverless. No separate server process. 103 | Client-server model for persistence. 103 | LanceDB's serverless model is simpler and more resource-efficient for a single-machine deployment.

Memory Usage | Lower. IVF index has a smaller memory footprint. 108 | Higher. HNSW graph structure is memory-intensive. | Decisive Factor: The lower memory usage of IVF preserves precious VRAM for the active LLM.

Performance | Excellent query speed, optimized for disk-based access. 101 | Good query speed, but can degrade on disk without sufficient RAM. 115 | Better suited for a system that may need to page data from disk due to VRAM constraints.

Deployment | High simplicity. pip install and connect to a local path. 105 | Adds complexity for persistent mode (e.g., Docker setup). 117 | Aligns perfectly with the local-first, bare-metal requirement.

Technology | Isolation Mechanism | Security Strength | Startup Time | Performance Overhead | A4PS Suitability

Docker (LXC) | Shared Host Kernel (Namespaces/cgroups) | Low | Milliseconds | Low | Unsuitable. Shared kernel presents a significant attack surface for untrusted, self-generated code.145

gVisor | User-space Kernel / Syscall Interception | Medium-High | Sub-second | Low (CPU), Higher (I/O) | Optimal. Strong balance of security and performance. Reduces host kernel attack surface significantly.138

Firecracker | Hardware Virtualization / MicroVM | High | Seconds | Low (near native) | Viable but less ideal. Strongest isolation, but longer startup time may slow down the rapid, iterative debugging loop of the Tool Forge.139

Model | Parameters | Quantized Size (Q4_K_M) | MMLU Score | HumanEval (Pass@1) | Key Strengths

Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct | 3.8B | ~2.5 GB | ~69% | ~74% | Exceptional reasoning for its size, VRAM-efficient.

Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct | 8B | ~5.0 GB | ~82% | ~88% | State-of-the-art performance, but larger VRAM footprint.59

Qwen2-7B-Instruct | 7B | ~4.5 GB | ~75% | ~80% | Strong coding and logic, excellent throughput.60

Gemma-2-9B-it | 9B | ~5.5 GB | ~78% | ~77% | Robust general-purpose reasoning, good balance.59