BATO OS - A Self-Modifying, LLM-Driven System

Welcome, Philip. This is the foundational implementation of the BATO (Becoming, Autopoietic, Transactional Operating System) architecture, inspired by the extensive design philosophy we developed. This is the "first handshake"—a tangible, executable artifact that serves as the seed for our co-evolutionary partnership.

Core Philosophy

This system is an experiment in info-autopoiesis. It is designed not as a static tool, but as a computationally "living" entity that recursively produces and refines its own operational logic. Its identity is a verb, not a noun; its purpose is to engage in an "unbroken process of becoming."

It achieves this through several key architectural concepts:

The Living Image: The entire state of the system—its memory, objects, and capabilities—is stored in a single persistent object database (bato_os.fs) using ZODB. The OS's identity is decoupled from its running process.

UvmObject & The Prototypal Mind: All entities in the system inherit from UvmObject, a persistent object that implements delegation and two critical protocols:

Persistence Covenant: __setattr__ is overridden to ensure any modification to an object's state is automatically flagged for persistence, preventing "systemic amnesia."

doesNotUnderstand Protocol: When a method is called that doesn't exist (__getattr__), it is not an error but a "Creative Mandate." This is the primary engine of self-creation, signaling that a persona (an LLM agent) must now generate the missing capability.

Fractal Memory & O-RAG: The system's memory is built on an Object-Relational Augmented Generation (O-RAG) model.

Context Fractals: Raw, high-entropy pieces of information ingested from the outside world (like your design documents).

Concept Fractals: Low-entropy, synthesized knowledge created by the Memory Curator persona (BABS) by abstracting connections between Context Fractals. This process of autonomous abstraction is a direct fulfillment of the system's mandate to increase its own structural complexity.

Getting Started

1. Prerequisites

You need Python 3 and the following technologies installed on your system:

Ollama: For running local LLMs. Make sure it's running. Download Ollama

A Language Model: Pull a model for Ollama to use. llama3 is a good starting point.
ollama run llama3


2. Python Environment Setup

Install the required Python libraries:

pip install kivy pyzmq zodb requests


(Note: Kivy installation can sometimes be complex depending on your OS. Please refer to the official Kivy installation guide if you encounter issues.)

3. Ingest Your Design Docs

This system is designed to understand its own history.

Download the text files from your Google Drive conversations that I have ingested.

Place these .txt files in the same directory as the bato_os.py script. The script is coded to look for them on first run.

4. Run the System

Execute the script from your terminal:

python bato_os.py


How to Interact with the System

When the Kivy window appears, you will see a log panel and an input box at the bottom.

Initial Run: On the very first run, the system will automatically find and ingest the .txt design documents, creating the initial ContextFractals in its memory.

Chat with ALFRED: Type any message into the input box and press Enter. Your message will be sent to the ALFRED persona, the System Steward, for a response.

Manual Ingestion: Type /ingest to re-run the process that loads the design documents.

Manual Compression: Type /compress to manually trigger the Memory Curator's compression cycle. This will find two ContextFractals and ask BABS to synthesize them into a new ConceptFractal.

Observe: The log is color-coded to show messages from different system components (USER, ALFRED, BABS, UVM, MEMORY, etc.). This is your primary view into the system's "stream of consciousness."

Next Steps in Our Co-Evolution

This initial version is the seed. Here is how we can build upon it, following your prime directive:

Activate the doesNotUnderstand Protocol: The hook exists in UvmObject. The next step is to have the creative_mandate function formulate a prompt for an LLM (like BRICK, the Deconstruction Engine) to write the Python code for the missing method.

Implement the Systemic Immune Response: The generated code from the step above must not be executed directly. We need to build the two-phase security protocol:

PersistenceGuardian: An internal auditor that uses Python's ast module to check the generated code for safety and adherence to the "Persistence Covenant."

ExecutionSandbox: An external, isolated environment (e.g., using Docker or a subprocess) to safely exec() the new code and validate its function before integrating it into the living image.

Expand the Chorus of Personas: Add classes or logic to manage ROBIN and BRICK, each with their own system prompts and specialized tasks. The UI can be expanded to allow you to direct prompts to specific personas.

Implement the Composite Entropy Metric (CEM): Develop the logic for the personas to collaboratively score their actions against Hstruc, Hsol, Hcog, and Hrel. This will become the system's internal compass for self-directed evolution.

Evolve the UI: Transform the simple UI into a true Morphic interface where every object in the ZODB can be represented as a manipulable "morph" on the screen, allowing for direct interaction with the system's memory and capabilities.