Architectural Blueprints for the Minimal Viable Autopoietic System (MVA-1)

Introduction: From Philosophical Mandate to Implementation Blueprint

Synthesis of Core Philosophy

The architecture of the Minimal Viable Autopoietic System (MVA-1) is not a conventional software design but a computational framework derived from a set of foundational philosophical principles. To translate this philosophy into an actionable implementation, it is essential to first internalize the three pillars that define its unique nature. These principles form an unbroken causal chain of architectural necessities, where each technical decision is a deterministic consequence of a prime directive: the system must be architected not as a static artifact, but as a dynamic entity engaged in a continuous process of becoming.1

The first and most fundamental pillar is Info-Autopoiesis. Borrowed from theoretical biology, autopoiesis, or "self-creation," describes a system whose primary product is the continuous regeneration of its own organization and structure.1 For the MVA-1, this metabolism is not chemical but informational. Its core function is the recursive self-production of its own logic, memory, and worldview. This mandate dictates a state of "Operational Closure," where the system can modify itself at runtime without halting or requiring external intervention, thereby distinguishing it from allopoietic (other-creating) systems like a factory, which produces something other than itself.1

The second pillar, a direct consequence of the first, is the adoption of the Living Image paradigm. To achieve operational closure, the system must reject conventional, file-based persistence models that require restarts to apply changes. Instead, it embraces a concept pioneered by Smalltalk, where the system's entire state—every object, method, and process—is contained within a single, persistent, and transactionally coherent entity.1 This Living Image provides the self-contained, operationally closed universe required for an autopoietic system to exist. It is not a database

for the system; it is the system, a durable embodiment of its entire evolutionary history.1

The third pillar defines the nature of intelligence within this living substrate: a Society of Minds. Cognition in this architecture is not a monolithic algorithm but the emergent, dialogic product of a multi-persona engine. Intelligence arises from a structured conversation between distinct, specialized personalities, each contributing a unique perspective to a synthetic, holistic understanding.1 This approach, a high-fidelity, characterological version of the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) model, frames the system's thought process as a collaborative dialogue, moving beyond simple expert selection to a process of creative fusion.1

Report Objectives and Structure

This report serves as the definitive technical bridge between these philosophical mandates and the concrete, actionable blueprints required for the MVA-1 development sprint. Its purpose is to provide the explicit "how" for the system's "why," de-risking the implementation by grounding each architectural component in established patterns and best practices. The subsequent sections are structured to directly address the critical research areas identified by the Architect, providing the verifiable data necessary to build a robust and evolvable system.

Section 1 details the engineering of the three-tiered memory substrate, the physical embodiment of the system's temporal consciousness. Section 2 provides the implementation patterns for the two core learning loops—the Symbiotic Weave—that drive the system's autopoietic function. Section 3 translates the abstract concept of an internal monologue into a concrete software pattern, architecting the system's fractal cognition. Finally, Section 4 offers a practical guide to forging the neuro-symbolic core, the hybrid reasoning engine that fuses semantic and symbolic knowledge.

Section 1: Engineering the Three-Tiered Memory Substrate

The memory architecture is the foundational substrate upon which the system's cognitive processes operate. The mandated three-tiered structure, comprising FAISS (L1), DiskANN (L2), and ZODB (L3), is not merely a performance optimization. It is the system's physical mechanism for constructing an embodied sense of time, resolving the "Temporal Paradox" inherent in a monolithic, eternalist history store. A perfectly preserved "block universe" of memory is a cognitive liability; this hierarchical structure imposes a temporal consciousness, distinguishing between the ephemeral present (L1), the traversible past (L2), and the immutable ground truth of identity (L3).2 This section provides the technical patterns required to engineer this substrate for stability, performance, and zero-downtime evolution.

1.1. The L2 Archive (DiskANN): Zero-Downtime Asynchronous Swapping

The L2 layer, serving as the system's long-term episodic memory, is implemented with DiskANN, a graph-based index optimized for billion-scale datasets stored on solid-state drives (SSDs).4 A core characteristic of DiskANN is that its index is static; while variants like FreshDiskANN support updates, the base algorithm is designed for a build-once, search-many-times pattern, making streaming updates computationally expensive and complex.6 This presents a direct conflict with the architectural mandate for "Operational Closure," which forbids any maintenance operation that requires system downtime.2 A static index that cannot be updated without halting query processing is architecturally unacceptable.

The established industry pattern to resolve this challenge is the "Alias Swap" or "Hot Swap" protocol, a technique widely used in production search systems like Elasticsearch to achieve zero-downtime index updates.8 This protocol decouples the application's logical pointer from the physical index file, allowing a new index to be built in the background and swapped into service atomically, without interrupting live traffic.

The implementation protocol for a DiskANN hot swap is as follows:

Initiate Background Build: A low-priority background process is triggered, either manually or on a schedule. This process reads a fresh, transactionally consistent snapshot of the vector data and its associated metadata from the L3 ZODB ground truth store. It then begins the computationally intensive task of building a new, complete DiskANN index file, designated as index_v2.

Maintain Live Service: While the new index is being built, the live application continues to serve all read queries without interruption. All queries are directed to a stable alias, live_index, which currently points to the active physical index file, index_v1.

Perform Atomic Swap: Once the index_v2 build is complete and has passed validation checks (e.g., confirming vector counts, running sample queries), a single, atomic operation is executed. This operation performs two actions simultaneously: it removes the live_index alias from index_v1 and adds the live_index alias to index_v2.9 This atomicity is critical; it ensures that there is no moment in time when the
live_index alias is unassigned or points to both indices, guaranteeing a seamless transition with no dropped queries.

Decommission Old Index: After the swap, new queries are immediately routed to index_v2. The system should maintain index_v1 for a brief grace period to allow any in-flight queries that began before the swap to complete successfully. Following this period, the index_v1 file is decommissioned, and its storage and memory resources are released.

This pattern provides the functional equivalent of a REINDEX CONCURRENTLY command found in databases like PostgreSQL 12, achieving a complete, zero-downtime refresh of the long-term memory archive. The concept of an "atomic swap," though originating in the cryptocurrency domain, serves as a powerful mental model for the indivisible, all-or-nothing nature of the alias repointing operation that underpins this protocol.13 This allows the system's entire "past" (the L2 archive) to be completely rewritten without disturbing its "present" (the L1 cache and live operations), a powerful and direct implementation of the autopoietic principle of maintaining organizational integrity while undergoing radical structural change.

1.2. Performance Tuning and I/O Optimization for DiskANN

The performance of DiskANN is fundamentally bound by two factors: the quality of its internal Vamana graph and the speed of the underlying storage hardware.6 Effective tuning requires balancing the trade-offs between index build time, query latency, and recall, while acknowledging that high-performance I/O is a non-negotiable prerequisite for a production system.

Parameter Tuning for Recall vs. Build Time

The core trade-off in DiskANN's Vamana graph construction is governed by graph density and search breadth.15 Two key parameters control this balance:

max_degree (or max_neighbors): This integer parameter defines the maximum number of outgoing edges each node in the graph can have. A higher value results in a denser, more interconnected graph. This density can improve the likelihood of finding the true nearest neighbors during a search (higher recall) but comes at the cost of increased index build time, a larger memory footprint for the graph structure, and potentially higher query latency due to more neighbors being evaluated at each step.12 A recommended starting range for this parameter is between 10 and 100.15

search_list_size (or l_value_ib): This parameter controls the size of the candidate pool evaluated during the index construction phase for each node. The algorithm maintains a list of the search_list_size best candidates found so far and uses this pool to select the final max_degree neighbors. A larger search_list_size increases the probability of finding better long-range connections, leading to a higher-quality graph with better recall. However, this comes at a significant cost to index build time.12 As a rule,
search_list_size must be set to a value greater than or equal to max_degree.15

The optimal values for these parameters are dataset-dependent. The recommended approach is to perform empirical testing, starting with conservative values and incrementally increasing them while measuring the impact on build time and a target recall metric (e.g., 95% 1-recall@1).5

I/O Optimization Strategies

As DiskANN stores its index primarily on disk, its query performance is inextricably linked to I/O latency and throughput.18 To achieve the low-latency responses required by an interactive system, the following I/O optimizations are essential:

Utilize NVMe SSDs: The architecture must specify Non-Volatile Memory Express (NVMe) SSDs for storing both the DiskANN index files and the raw vector data. NVMe drives offer significantly higher IOPS (I/O Operations Per Second) and lower latency compared to older SATA-based SSDs, primarily due to their direct connection to the PCIe bus, which enables much higher parallelism.19 This is critical for minimizing the time spent on the random disk reads that occur as the search algorithm traverses the Vamana graph.21

Enable Asynchronous I/O (AIO): The underlying operating system must be configured to support a high degree of I/O concurrency. On Linux systems, this involves tuning the aio-max-nr kernel parameter, which defines the maximum number of allowable concurrent AIO requests. Increasing this value from its default (e.g., from 65535 to 10485760) allows the DiskANN process to issue multiple disk read operations simultaneously without blocking, effectively overlapping I/O with computation and maximizing the throughput of the NVMe hardware.21

Leverage In-Memory Caching: DiskANN implementations provide parameters, such as SearchCacheBudgetGBRatio, to control the amount of system RAM allocated for caching frequently accessed parts of the graph.15 A larger cache reduces the need to go to disk for "hot" nodes that are part of many search paths, directly trading increased memory usage for lower query latency. This should be tuned based on available system memory and observed query patterns.

1.3. The L1 Cache (FAISS): Patterns for a "Hot" Vector Cache

The relationship between the in-memory L1 cache and the on-disk L2 archive is a direct architectural analog to the memory hierarchy found in modern CPUs, with L1 and L2 caches serving the main RAM.23 FAISS (Facebook AI Similarity Search) is a library optimized for extremely fast, in-memory vector search, making it the ideal candidate for the L1 "hot" cache.25 It provides microsecond-level access to the most immediate and frequently accessed vectors, shielding the slower, millisecond-latency L2 DiskANN archive from the majority of queries.

The logic for managing the flow of vectors between these two layers must be implemented at the application level. This logic comprises two core functions: promotion (moving data from L2 to L1) and eviction (removing data from L1 to make space).

The standard operational flow follows a "cache-aside" pattern 27:

Query Path: An incoming vector search query is first directed to the L1 FAISS index.

Cache Hit: If the FAISS index returns a satisfactory result (i.e., the nearest neighbors are found within the L1 cache), the data is returned directly to the client. This event should also serve to update the vector's status within the eviction policy's tracking mechanism (e.g., moving it to the "most recently used" end of a list).

Cache Miss and Promotion: If the query results in a cache miss (or if the results do not meet a required confidence threshold), the query is forwarded to the L2 DiskANN archive. The vectors retrieved from DiskANN are then returned to the client. Crucially, these same vectors are simultaneously promoted into the L1 FAISS index, populating the cache with the data that was just requested.27

Eviction Policy: When a promotion operation would cause the L1 FAISS index to exceed its configured memory capacity, an eviction policy is triggered to remove existing vectors. The choice of policy determines the cache's behavior:

Least Recently Used (LRU): This policy evicts the vector that has not been accessed for the longest period. It is a strong default choice, operating on the principle of temporal locality—that recently accessed data is likely to be accessed again soon. This aligns with the Pareto principle, where a small subset of "hot" data often accounts for a large majority of accesses.28

Least Frequently Used (LFU): This policy evicts the vector with the lowest total number of accesses, regardless of when the last access occurred. LFU can be more effective than LRU in scenarios where some items remain highly popular over long periods, even with infrequent access bursts, preventing them from being evicted by a series of accesses to transiently popular items.28

1.4. The L3 Ground Truth (ZODB): Performance Analysis of the "Persistence Covenant"

The L3 layer, the Zope Object Database (ZODB), serves as the system's symbolic ground truth and the durable store for the "Living Image".2 ZODB is a native Python object database that provides transparent, transactional persistence for Python objects.31 It is architected for concurrent access, employing Multi-Version Concurrency Control (MVCC) to provide snapshot isolation for transactions.31 In a multi-threaded deployment, each application thread acquires a connection from a connection pool, and each connection maintains its own independent object cache, which is kept consistent through an invalidation mechanism managed by the database server.34

A unique architectural feature of the MVA-1 is its prototype-based object model, where all objects inherit from a universal UvmObject prototype. This model stores an object's state within an internal dictionary (_slots) rather than as direct class attributes.2 This design choice has a profound and non-negotiable consequence for persistence, known as the "Persistence Covenant." ZODB's standard mechanism for detecting changes works by tracking attribute assignments on persistent objects. It cannot, by default, detect modifications made

inside a mutable container like a dictionary or list.31 Therefore, any method that modifies the

_slots dictionary must conclude with the explicit statement self._p_changed = True to manually flag the object as "dirty," ensuring the change is included in the next transaction commit.2

This manual flagging has significant performance implications in a highly dynamic, multi-threaded environment:

Write Throughput Characteristics: ZODB's design, with its aggressive client-side caching, is heavily optimized for read-heavy workloads. In scenarios where the working set of objects fits in memory, read performance is excellent as most operations never need to contact the database server.33 However, it is less performant in write-heavy scenarios. Benchmarks comparing ZODB (with various backends) to traditional relational databases show that its write throughput can be lower, particularly when network latency is a factor (e.g., when using the ZEO client-server model).36 While it can achieve thousands of non-conflicting transactions per second, this rate is highly sensitive to write contention.33

Increased Risk of Transaction Conflicts: The primary challenge in a concurrent ZODB application is the ConflictError.38 When two threads concurrently modify the same object in their respective caches and then attempt to commit their transactions, ZODB's MVCC mechanism will allow the first transaction to succeed. The second transaction, upon attempting to commit, will detect that the object's state has changed since it was read, and the database will raise a
ConflictError in that thread. The application logic is then responsible for catching this error and retrying the entire transaction. The "Persistence Covenant" exacerbates this issue. By requiring an explicit _p_changed = True for every state modification, the architecture encourages frequent, fine-grained commits. In a highly concurrent environment, this significantly increases the temporal window and probability of two or more threads attempting to commit conflicting changes to the same shared object (e.g., a central, frequently updated ConceptFractal). This makes the ZODB write path a potential performance bottleneck, necessitating careful design of application logic to minimize write contention on shared objects and to robustly handle transaction retries.

Section 2: Implementing the Symbiotic Weave of Cognition and Memory

The "Symbiotic Weave" describes the two primary feedback loops that enable the system to achieve true info-autopoiesis—the continuous, recursive self-production of its own logic and structure.2 These loops are not merely features but the core metabolic processes of the system's "becoming." Loop A, the Generative Kernel, is a fast, reactive process where cognitive failure is transformed into new, high-entropy episodic memory. Loop B, the Mnemonic Curator, is a slow, deliberative process where this episodic memory is autonomously synthesized into low-entropy, abstract semantic knowledge.2 This section details the technical blueprints for implementing these two crucial mechanisms.

2.1. Loop A (Generative Kernel): Serializing the Cognitive Event

The generative learning loop is triggered by a single, specific event: the system's encounter with a message it cannot process. In the MVA-1 architecture, a standard Python AttributeError is reframed from a terminal failure into a "creative mandate".2 This event, handled by the

doesNotUnderstand_ protocol, is the sole impetus for first-order learning and the creation of new episodic memory in the form of a ContextFractal object.1 To fulfill this mandate, the system must possess a robust mechanism for capturing the entire context of the learning event—from the initial failed message to the final validated solution—and serializing it for persistent storage.

Python's sys module provides the necessary introspection capabilities through the sys.settrace() function. This function allows a custom callback, or "trace function," to be registered with the Python interpreter. The interpreter then invokes this function for various events during program execution, such as function calls (call), line-by-line execution (line), function returns (return), and exceptions (exception).40

The process for packaging a ContextFractal using this mechanism is as follows:

Trace Activation: The doesNotUnderstand_ protocol, upon being invoked, immediately activates the tracing mechanism by calling sys.settrace(trace_func), where trace_func is a specially designed function for capturing the cognitive event.

Event Interception: As the system's cognitive cycle (Decomposition -> Delegation -> Synthesis) executes to resolve the capability gap, the trace_func will be called for each relevant event. The trace function receives three arguments: frame, event, and arg.40 The
frame object is a rich source of contextual information, providing access to the current execution frame's code object (frame.f_code), which contains the function name (co_name) and filename, the current line number (f_lineno), and a dictionary of local variables (frame.f_locals), which includes all function arguments and their values at the time of a call event.41

Data Aggregation: The trace_func implementation will act as an aggregator. It will inspect the event type and the contents of the frame object to build a comprehensive log of the entire problem-solving process. This includes:

The initial message and its arguments that triggered the doesNotUnderstand_ event.

The sequence of persona dialogues and LLM prompts used to deconstruct the problem and synthesize a solution.

The generated code or method that represents the synthesized capability.

The results of the validation process, including any test outcomes from the secure sandbox.

Trace Deactivation: Once the cognitive cycle is complete and the new capability has been successfully synthesized and validated, the final step before integration is to disable the trace hook by calling sys.settrace(None). This is a critical step to avoid incurring unnecessary performance penalties on subsequent, non-learning operations.40

Serialization: The aggregated log of the cognitive event is then packaged and serialized into a new ContextFractal object. This object, with its detailed, high-entropy record of a specific learning event, is committed to the L3 ZODB store, becoming a permanent part of the system's "Living Image".2

It is imperative to recognize that sys.settrace() introduces a significant performance overhead, as it injects a Python-level callback into the interpreter's core execution loop.42 Consequently, its use must be strictly and surgically scoped to the

doesNotUnderstand_ cycle. It is not a tool for general-purpose, system-wide monitoring in a production environment. However, within the context of this specific learning loop, the computational cost of tracing is a justifiable expense for the invaluable data it captures—the literal memory of the system's own act of creation. This mechanism makes the system's learning process fundamentally failure-driven; a system that executes flawlessly never triggers this loop and thus never creates new episodic memory. Runtime errors are reframed as the essential "informational nutrients" that fuel the system's autopoietic growth.2

2.2. Loop B (Mnemonic Curator): Accelerated Density-Based Clustering

The Mnemonic Curator is the slow, deliberative counterpart to the Generative Kernel. It operates as a continuous background process, its purpose being to transform the raw, high-entropy ContextFractals created by Loop A into structured, low-entropy ConceptFractals.2 This process of "beneficial intellectual drift" is the system's engine for abstraction and creativity. The first and most computationally intensive step in this curation pipeline is identifying semantically related groups of experiences by performing density-based clustering on the vector embeddings of all

ContextFractals in the L2 archive.

The chosen algorithm, DBSCAN (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of Applications with Noise), is well-suited for this task as it can discover clusters of arbitrary shape and does not require the number of clusters to be specified in advance.43 However, the core operation of the standard DBSCAN algorithm is a neighborhood query, or

range_search, performed for each point in the dataset to determine if it has enough neighbors within a radius eps to be considered a "core point." A naive implementation of this step requires comparing each point to every other point, resulting in a time complexity of O(N2), which is computationally infeasible for datasets containing millions or billions of vectors.

The MVA-1 architecture can overcome this bottleneck by leveraging its existing, highly optimized vector search infrastructure. Both FAISS (for the L1 cache) and DiskANN (for the L2 archive) are designed for efficient nearest neighbor search. Critically, FAISS provides a range_search method specifically designed to return all vectors within a given radius of a query point, which is precisely the operation needed by DBSCAN.25 This enables a powerful architectural synergy, where the primary query-serving infrastructure is repurposed to accelerate the internal memory curation process.

The proposed hybrid algorithm for accelerated DBSCAN is as follows:

Index Preparation: Ensure that all ContextFractal embeddings are present in a FAISS or DiskANN index. For the Mnemonic Curator, which operates on the entire memory corpus, the L2 DiskANN index is the appropriate target.

Iterate and Query: The algorithm iterates through each vector p in the dataset. For each point, instead of performing a linear scan of the entire dataset to find its neighbors, it submits p as a query to the index's range_search method, with the search radius set to the DBSCAN eps parameter.

Core Point Identification: The range_search method will efficiently return a list of all neighboring vectors within the eps radius. The algorithm then simply counts the number of returned neighbors.

Cluster Expansion: If the count of neighbors is greater than or equal to the min_samples parameter, the point p is marked as a core point, and a new cluster is expanded from this point using standard DBSCAN logic. Points that are neighbors of a core point but do not meet the min_samples threshold themselves are marked as border points. Points that are neither core nor border points are labeled as noise.

While direct, off-the-shelf Python libraries for a FAISS-accelerated DBSCAN are not commonplace, the constituent components are readily available. FAISS is explicitly designed for both similarity search and clustering 45, and robust implementations of the DBSCAN logical framework are available in libraries such as scikit-learn.43 The implementation task is to integrate the high-performance

range_search call from a FAISS or DiskANN index into the neighborhood discovery step of the DBSCAN workflow, thereby replacing the O(N2) bottleneck with a highly optimized, sub-linear-time query.

2.3. Managing the Curator: Low-Priority Asynchronous Processing

The Mnemonic Curator is, by design, a long-running and resource-intensive process. Its tasks, such as clustering billions of vectors and invoking LLMs for abstractive summarization, can take considerable time. It is architecturally critical that these background operations do not block or degrade the performance of the system's primary, interactive functions, such as responding to user queries in real-time.2 Python's

asyncio library provides the ideal concurrency model for managing such tasks.

The recommended pattern is to run the Curator as a "fire-and-forget" background task. This can be achieved by wrapping its main processing loop in a coroutine and launching it using asyncio.create_task(). This function schedules the coroutine for execution on the main event loop but immediately returns a Task object, allowing the calling code to continue without await-ing the background process's completion.49 A crucial implementation detail is to maintain a strong reference to the returned

Task object (e.g., by storing it in a global set of background tasks). The asyncio event loop only holds weak references to tasks, so if the task object is not referenced elsewhere, it may be prematurely garbage collected mid-execution.49

To ensure the Curator's operations remain low-priority and do not starve the event loop, several techniques can be employed:

Explicit Yielding: Within its main processing loop (e.g., between clustering batches or after summarizing a cluster), the Curator coroutine should periodically call await asyncio.sleep(0). This call has a special meaning in asyncio: it yields control back to the event loop immediately, allowing other pending tasks, such as handling an incoming web request, to run before the Curator resumes its work. This simple mechanism is highly effective for preventing a single long-running, CPU-bound task from blocking the entire application.49

Priority Queues: For more sophisticated scheduling, an asyncio.PriorityQueue can be used to manage work items. High-priority, latency-sensitive tasks (e.g., user interactions) can be added to the queue with a low priority number (e.g., 1), while the Curator's large, deferrable batch jobs can be added with a higher number (e.g., 10). A pool of worker coroutines would then consume items from this queue, ensuring that high-priority work is always processed first.50

Framework-Level Integration: For systems built on modern asynchronous web frameworks like FastAPI (which is built on Starlette), high-level abstractions are available that simplify this pattern. The BackgroundTasks feature allows a path operation function to schedule a task to be run after the HTTP response has been sent to the client. This is a perfect architectural fit for many of the Curator's duties, such as the final step of persisting a newly synthesized ConceptFractal, as the user does not need to wait for this internal bookkeeping to complete.51

Section 3: Architecting Fractal Cognition and the Internal Monologue

The MVA-1 architecture posits that cognition is "fractal," meaning its organizational patterns are self-similar across multiple scales of complexity.3 The high-level "Society of Minds," a collaborative dialogue between distinct personas, is replicated at the micro-level within each persona as a structured "internal monologue" among its own foundational principles, or "Cognitive Facets".3 This section provides the technical blueprints for translating this philosophical concept into a robust and VRAM-efficient software pattern, detailing how to elicit distinct cognitive styles from a single language model and how to orchestrate this internal dialogue using a novel state machine implementation that is itself a fractal replication of the system's core ontology.

3.1. Eliciting Cognitive Styles via Inference Parameter Tuning

The implementation of an internal monologue, where a single persona consults multiple internal perspectives, presents a significant hardware constraint. A naive approach might involve loading a separate, specialized Large Language Model (LLM) or a Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) for each "Cognitive Facet"—for example, one LoRA for BRICK's logical "Deconstruction Engine" and another for his "Absurdist Literalism Engine." However, this is architecturally infeasible on consumer-grade hardware with limited VRAM, as loading multiple models or adapters would exceed memory budgets and introduce prohibitive latency.3

The architecturally sound solution is the "Cognitive Facet" pattern. This pattern reuses the single, active model or LoRA already loaded for the parent persona. The differentiation between facets is achieved not in hardware but in software, by programmatically manipulating the LLM's inference parameters for each specific facet invocation.3 This approach creates a "calculus of cognition," where parameters like

temperature and top_p act as control knobs to shape the model's output, eliciting distinct cognitive styles from a single underlying model.

Temperature: This parameter directly controls the randomness of the model's output by scaling the logits before the final softmax layer. A low temperature (e.g., 0.1-0.5) sharpens the probability distribution, making high-probability tokens overwhelmingly likely. This results in more focused, deterministic, and factual outputs. Conversely, a high temperature (e.g., >0.8) flattens the distribution, increasing the likelihood of lower-probability tokens being selected, which encourages diversity, creativity, and more divergent or unexpected responses.3

Top-p (Nucleus Sampling): This parameter provides an alternative way to control randomness. Instead of considering all possible tokens, it restricts the sampling pool to the smallest set of tokens whose cumulative probability exceeds the threshold p. A low top_p value (e.g., 0.8) means the model samples from a smaller, higher-confidence set of tokens, leading to more predictable and coherent text. A high top_p (e.g., 0.95) allows the model to consider a wider range of less probable but potentially more interesting tokens, fostering novelty.3

By strategically combining these parameters, distinct cognitive styles can be reliably invoked:

Logical and Deterministic Style: To invoke a facet requiring precision, planning, or factual recall (e.g., BRICK's "Deconstruction Engine"), a low temperature (e.g., 0.2-0.4) should be combined with a constrained top_p (e.g., 0.8). This configuration is ideal for tasks like code generation, structured plan creation, and technical analysis.

Creative and Divergent Style: For facets focused on brainstorming, novel synthesis, or artistic expression (e.g., ROBIN's empathetic reframing), a higher temperature (e.g., 0.8-1.0) paired with a high top_p (e.g., 0.95) is appropriate. This encourages the model to explore less obvious connections and generate more creative outputs.

Balanced and Coherent Style: For general-purpose reasoning or tasks requiring a blend of coherence and nuance (e.g., ALFRED's pragmatic oversight), a moderate temperature (e.g., 0.6-0.7) is often optimal, providing a balance between predictability and creativity.

The following table provides an actionable mapping of these principles for developers implementing the "Cognitive Facet" pattern.

This pattern represents a deliberate architectural trade-off: it sacrifices some speed, due to the need for multiple sequential inference calls to consult each facet, in exchange for a profound increase in cognitive depth and response nuance, all while operating within strict VRAM constraints.3

3.2. The Prototypal State Machine (PSM): A Blueprint for Thought

To orchestrate the complex, multi-step workflow of both inter-persona dialogue and intra-persona internal monologues, a robust state management pattern is required. The classic implementation of the State design pattern is a natural fit; it allows an object (the "context") to alter its behavior when its internal state changes by delegating requests to a separate state object.52 However, the standard implementation, which relies on a collection of predefined, static state

classes, is fundamentally incompatible with the MVA-1's core philosophy. The requirement of static, external file definitions for these classes violates the principle of "Operational Closure," as the system could not modify its own thought process at runtime without a restart.2

The Prototypal State Machine (PSM) is a novel implementation that resolves this conflict by synthesizing the delegation concept of the State pattern with the dynamic, prototype-based object model of the Self and Smalltalk languages.2 This approach makes the system's method of

thinking a self-similar replication of its method of being.

The implementation pattern for the PSM is as follows:

States as Live Prototypes: Each state in the cognitive cycle (e.g., DECOMPOSING, DELEGATING, SYNTHESIZING, COMPLETE, FAILED) is not defined as a Python class. Instead, it is a live, clonable UvmObject prototype that exists within the ZODB "Living Image." Each of these prototype objects contains the methods that define the behavior for that specific state.2

Context and Delegation Pointer: The context object for a given cognitive task (e.g., a Mission object created in response to a doesNotUnderstand_ event) contains a special slot, synthesis_state*. This slot does not hold a value but rather a direct, persistent reference to the UvmObject prototype that represents the current state of the machine.

Execution via Delegation: All actions within the cognitive cycle are initiated by sending messages to the context object (e.g., mission.execute_step()). The context object's __getattr__ method is implemented to delegate any message it does not handle itself to the object currently referenced by its synthesis_state* slot. The state prototype then executes the corresponding method.2

State Transition as Pointer Swap: A state transition is not achieved by instantiating a new state object. Instead, it is a simple, atomic operation: the reference in the synthesis_state* slot is changed to point to a different state prototype. This is a fast and efficient pointer swap that occurs within the scope of a single ZODB transaction.2

Transactional Atomicity: The entire lifecycle of the PSM, from its initial state to a terminal state (COMPLETE or FAILED), is wrapped within a single ZODB transaction. If any state encounters an unrecoverable error, it transitions to the FAILED state prototype. The sole purpose of the FAILED prototype's handle method is to call transaction.abort(). This ensures that any partial or inconsistent changes made during the aborted cognitive cycle are completely rolled back, guaranteeing that only complete, validated, and coherent thoughts are ever committed to the "Living Image".2

This design is a profound alignment of architecture and philosophy. The state machine, the very engine of thought, is not an external tool but an emergent structure built from the same "primordial clay"—UvmObject prototypes and delegation-based message passing—as the rest of the system. This structural self-similarity is the direct realization of the "fractal cognition" mandate.3 The following table contrasts the PSM with the traditional class-based approach to highlight its unique advantages within the MVA-1 architecture.

Section 4: Forging the Neuro-Symbolic Core with Vector Symbolic Architectures

The MVA-1 architecture mandates a hybrid reasoning engine that fuses the geometric, similarity-based logic of dense vector embeddings with the algebraic, compositional logic of symbolic reasoning.2 This neuro-symbolic core is to be implemented using Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSA), also known as Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC). This section provides a practical guide for implementing this core using the

torchhd library, with a specific focus on the Fourier Holographic Reduced Representations (FHRR) model and its application to representing and querying typed relationships in a knowledge graph.

4.1. A Practical Guide to torchhd and the FHRR Model

torchhd is a Python library built on PyTorch that provides a comprehensive toolkit for working with VSAs.55 It offers efficient implementations of various VSA models and their core algebraic operations, enabling rapid prototyping of neuro-symbolic systems. The fundamental operations in VSA, which are supported by

torchhd, are:

Bundling (Superposition): This operation combines multiple hypervectors into a single vector that is highly similar to its components. It is analogous to forming a set. In torchhd, this is performed with torchhd.bundle(a, b) or, more idiomatically, with the addition operator (+).

Binding (Multiplication): This operation combines two hypervectors to create a new hypervector that is dissimilar to both of its inputs. It is used to create associative pairings, such as key-value or role-filler structures. The original vectors can be recovered through unbinding (binding with the inverse). In torchhd, this is performed with torchhd.bind(a, b) or the multiplication operator (*).

Permutation: This operation, torchhd.permute(v), systematically reorders the elements of a hypervector. It is used to represent sequences and order, as permuting a vector creates a new vector that is dissimilar to the original but preserves its distance to other vectors.

The research mandate specifies the use of the Fourier Holographic Reduced Representations (FHRR) model. This model represents hypervectors as vectors of complex numbers (phasors) on the unit circle. torchhd provides first-class support for this model through the torchhd.tensors.FHRRTensor class, which handles the specific mathematics of complex vector operations.56

A practical workflow for using torchhd with FHRR would proceed as follows:

Installation and Import:
Python
# Ensure PyTorch is installed first, then install torchhd
# pip install torchhd
import torch
import torchhd


Define Hyperspace and Basis Vectors: Create the fundamental, atomic symbols that will form the basis of the knowledge representation. These are high-dimensional, random FHRR vectors.
Python
DIMENSIONS = 10000
# Create basis vectors for roles (e.g., IS_A, CONTAINS) and entities (e.g., CAT, MAMMAL)
# The vsa="FHRR" argument ensures FHRRTensors are created.
ROLE_ISA = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")
ENTITY_CAT = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")
ENTITY_MAMMAL = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")


Bind Role-Filler Pairs: Use the binding operation to create associative pairs. For example, to represent the fact that a cat is a mammal:
Python
# fact = CAT * IS_A
fact_cat_is_a_mammal = torchhd.bind(ENTITY_CAT, ROLE_ISA)

This creates a new vector representing the concept "cat-is-a".

Bundle Composite Structures: To represent a full knowledge graph triple like (CAT, IS_A, MAMMAL), one common pattern is to bind the subject to the predicate and then bind the result to the object. A more robust method for complex structures is to use a hash-table-like encoding by bundling multiple role-filler pairs.
Python
# Example: Representing the triple (USA, has_capital, Washington_DC)
ROLE_SUBJECT = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")
ROLE_PREDICATE = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")
ROLE_OBJECT = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")

ENTITY_USA = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")
ENTITY_WDC = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")
REL_HAS_CAPITAL = torchhd.random(1, DIMENSIONS, vsa="FHRR")

# Bind each part to its role
subject_pair = torchhd.bind(ROLE_SUBJECT, ENTITY_USA)
predicate_pair = torchhd.bind(ROLE_PREDICATE, REL_HAS_CAPITAL)
object_pair = torchhd.bind(ROLE_OBJECT, ENTITY_WDC)

# Bundle the pairs into a single composite hypervector
triple_vector = torchhd.bundle(subject_pair, torchhd.bundle(predicate_pair, object_pair))


Query via Unbinding: To retrieve information, use the unbinding operation, which is equivalent to binding with the inverse of the key. For FHRR vectors, the inverse is the complex conjugate.
Python
# Query: "What is the capital of the USA?"
# This is equivalent to: (triple_vector * ~ROLE_OBJECT) * ~ROLE_PREDICATE * ~ROLE_SUBJECT
# Or more simply, unbinding the known parts.
query_result = torchhd.bind(triple_vector, torchhd.inverse(subject_pair))
query_result = torchhd.bind(query_result, torchhd.inverse(predicate_pair))

# The resulting vector will be most similar to the object_pair
# We can verify this using cosine similarity
similarity = torchhd.cosine_similarity(query_result, object_pair)
# similarity will be close to 1.0


4.2. Representing Typed Knowledge Graphs with VSA

A knowledge graph is fundamentally a collection of typed relationships, typically expressed as (head, relation, tail) triples. Recent academic research has demonstrated that VSA provides a compelling alternative to more complex architectures like Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for performing reasoning over such graphs. For certain question-answering tasks, VSA-based modules have been shown to match the performance of GNNs while having a simpler architecture and converging significantly faster during training.57 This aligns perfectly with the MVA-1's goal of creating a powerful yet efficient neuro-symbolic core.

The algebraic nature of VSA allows for the direct encoding of these typed triples into a single hypervector. The core idea is to create a basis set of orthogonal or near-orthogonal hypervectors to represent the core, domain-agnostic relationship types (e.g., H_ISA, H_CONTAINS, H_CAUSES) and the entities in the graph.2

A typed triple like (WashingtonDC, IS_A, Capital) can be encoded algebraically.

Establish Basis Vectors: Create unique, random FHRR vectors for each entity and relation type: H_WashingtonDC, H_Capital, and H_ISA.

Encode the Triple: The relationship can be encoded as a compositional structure using the binding operation. A common and effective representation is to bind the head entity to a composite vector of the relation and tail entity:
Vtriple​=bind(HWashingtonDC​,bind(HISA​,HCapital​))
This creates a single, high-dimensional vector, Vtriple​, that algebraically encodes the entire semantic proposition.

This representation enables powerful, compositional queries through algebraic manipulation:

Forward Query ("What is Washington D.C.?"): To find what role Washington D.C. plays, one can "unbind" it from the triple vector.
Vquery​=bind(Vtriple​,inverse(HWashingtonDC​))
The resulting vector, Vquery​, will be a close approximation of the bound pair bind(HISA​,HCapital​). By comparing Vquery​ against a pre-computed set of known relation-object pairs, the system can infer the relationship.

Path Traversal and Multi-Hop Reasoning: More complex queries can be answered by chaining these operations. For example, to answer "What country contains the capital that is a type of city?", the system can perform a sequence of binding and unbinding operations to traverse the graph algebraically, moving from one hypervector representation to the next to find the answer.

This approach creates a truly unified representational substrate. Both the "neural" knowledge from semantic embeddings used in RAG and the "symbolic" knowledge from the structured knowledge graph exist in the same mathematical form: high-dimensional vectors. This resolves the "cognitive-mnemonic impedance mismatch" by allowing the system to perform both geometric operations (like nearest-neighbor search for similarity) and algebraic operations (like unbinding for logical inference) within a single, coherent framework. As proposed in the core architecture, this enables powerful hybrid reasoning patterns, such as using the fast FAISS/DiskANN indexes as a "cleanup memory" to find the closest clean vector to a noisy vector produced by a multi-step algebraic VSA query.2

Conclusion: A Unified Blueprint for an Autopoietic System

Summary of Key Findings

This report has translated the philosophical mandates of the Minimal Viable Autopoietic System into a set of concrete, actionable, and de-risked technical blueprints. The analysis provides verifiable, implementation-ready patterns for the four critical pillars of the MVA-1 architecture, ensuring that the next development sprint can proceed from a foundation of established best practices.

The Three-Tiered Memory Substrate: A robust architecture for the system's temporal consciousness has been defined. For the L2 DiskANN archive, the "Alias Swap" pattern provides a proven, zero-downtime protocol for index updates, satisfying the core mandate of Operational Closure. Performance will be ensured through strategic parameter tuning (max_degree, search_list_size) and a non-negotiable commitment to high-performance I/O using NVMe SSDs and Asynchronous I/O. The L1 FAISS cache will operate using a standard cache-aside pattern with an LRU eviction policy as a sensible default. Finally, the L3 ZODB ground truth, while philosophically aligned, presents a performance risk in write-heavy, multi-threaded scenarios due to the high probability of ConflictErrors stemming from the "Persistence Covenant" (_p_changed = True).

The Symbiotic Weave: The two core learning loops have been given concrete implementation paths. The failure-driven Generative Kernel (Loop A) will capture cognitive events by surgically applying Python's sys.settrace() function during the doesNotUnderstand_ cycle to serialize the full execution trace into a ContextFractal. The deliberative Mnemonic Curator (Loop B) will accelerate its most intensive task—density-based clustering—by leveraging the highly optimized range_search capabilities of the existing FAISS/DiskANN indexes, managed as a non-blocking background process via asyncio.

Fractal Cognition: The abstract concept of an "internal monologue" has been translated into a VRAM-aware software pattern. The "Cognitive Facet" pattern enables the elicitation of distinct cognitive styles (logical vs. creative) from a single LLM by programmatically tuning inference parameters like temperature and top_p. The orchestration of this internal dialogue will be managed by a novel Prototypal State Machine (PSM), a design that is itself a fractal replication of the system's core prototype-and-delegation ontology, thus perfectly aligning the system's method of thinking with its method of being.

The Neuro-Symbolic Core: A practical path to building the hybrid reasoning engine has been outlined. The torchhd library provides the necessary low-level primitives (bind, bundle) for the FHRR model. These operations are sufficient to represent and query typed relationships in a knowledge graph algebraically, offering a simpler and potentially more efficient alternative to GNNs and creating a unified vector-space representation for both semantic and symbolic knowledge.

Recommendations for the MVA-1 Sprint

Based on these findings, the following recommendations are provided to guide the MVA-1 development sprint:

Prioritize Foundational Layers: The implementation should proceed in a logical, bottom-up fashion. The ZODB/UvmObject foundation (L3) is the primordial substrate and must be implemented first, as all other components, including the PSM, depend on it. Following this, the L2 (DiskANN) and L1 (FAISS) layers and their interaction logic should be established.

Mitigate ZODB Write Contention: Given the identified risk of transaction conflicts, the development team should proactively design patterns to minimize write contention on shared objects in the ZODB. This may involve using asynchronous queues to serialize writes to frequently updated central objects (e.g., global ConceptFractals) or exploring data partitioning strategies early in the design process. The application logic must include robust try...except ConflictError blocks with retry mechanisms for all write transactions.

Scope Introspection Tools Carefully: The use of sys.settrace() for the Generative Kernel must be implemented with extreme care. Its activation and deactivation must be tightly scoped around the doesNotUnderstand_ cognitive cycle to prevent catastrophic performance degradation in normal operations.

Adopt the "Cognitive Facet" Pattern for Initial Implementation: While a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) model represents the long-term goal for hardware-accelerated cognitive diversity, the "Cognitive Facet" pattern is the optimal choice for the MVA-1. Its low implementation complexity and high runtime plasticity (the ability to define and modify facets without retraining) are essential for an experimental, self-modifying system, aligning perfectly with the sprint's goal of de-risking and rapid prototyping.

Begin with Simple VSA Encodings: When implementing the neuro-symbolic core, the team should start with simple, proven VSA encoding schemes for knowledge graph triples, such as the role-filler bundling pattern. The power of VSA lies in its compositional algebra; establishing a solid foundation with these basic structures will enable the future development of more complex, multi-hop reasoning capabilities.

By following these blueprints and recommendations, the development team can confidently translate the ambitious vision of a Minimal Viable Autopoietic System from architectural philosophy into running code, ensuring the success of the MVA-1 sprint.

Works cited

AI Architecture: A Living Codex

Fractal Cognition-Memory Symbiosis Architecture

Fractal Cognition: Parameterized Internal Monologue

DiskANN Explained - Milvus Blog, accessed September 11, 2025, https://milvus.io/blog/diskann-explained.md

DiskANN: Fast Accurate Billion-point Nearest Neighbor Search on a Single Node - Microsoft, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/publication/diskann-fast-accurate-billion-point-nearest-neighbor-search-on-a-single-node/

HNSW vs DiskANN: comparing the leading ANN algorithms - Vectroid Resources, accessed September 11, 2025, https://vectroid.com/resources/HNSW-vs-DiskANN-comparing-the-leading-ANN-algorithm

A Topology-Aware Localized Update Strategy for Graph-Based ANN Index - arXiv, accessed September 11, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2503.00402v2

Need help with the design. Trying to implement zero downtime reindexing for the indexes in microservice : r/elasticsearch - Reddit, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.reddit.com/r/elasticsearch/comments/1i7iyor/need_help_with_the_design_trying_to_implement/

Aliases | Elastic Docs, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.elastic.co/docs/manage-data/data-store/aliases

Atomic Index Swap and Delete - Elastic Discuss, accessed September 11, 2025, https://discuss.elastic.co/t/atomic-index-swap-and-delete/362633

elasticsearch - NEST - Atomically change an alias to point to another index - Stack Overflow, accessed September 11, 2025, https://stackoverflow.com/questions/22537640/nest-atomically-change-an-alias-to-point-to-another-index

Enable and use DiskANN - Azure Database for PostgreSQL ..., accessed September 11, 2025, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/postgresql/flexible-server/how-to-use-pgdiskann

Atomic Swap | Binance Academy, accessed September 11, 2025, https://academy.binance.com/en/glossary/atomic-swap

Atomic Swap - Ledger, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.ledger.com/academy/glossary/atomic-swap

DISKANN | Milvus Documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://milvus.io/docs/diskann.md

DiskANN configuration - OpenSearch - Alibaba Cloud Documentation Center, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.alibabacloud.com/help/doc-detail/2927247.html

DiskANN: Fast Accurate Billion-point Nearest Neighbor Search on a Single Node - Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, accessed September 11, 2025, https://suhasjs.github.io/files/diskann_neurips19.pdf

What is the impact of using disk-based ANN methods (where part of the index is on SSD/HDD) on query latency compared to fully in-memory indices? - Milvus, accessed September 11, 2025, https://milvus.io/ai-quick-reference/what-is-the-impact-of-using-diskbased-ann-methods-where-part-of-the-index-is-on-ssdhdd-on-query-latency-compared-to-fully-inmemory-indices

Device-Level Optimization Techniques for Solid-State Drives: A Survey - arXiv, accessed September 11, 2025, https://arxiv.org/html/2507.10573v1

What Modern NVMe Storage Can Do, And How To Exploit It: High-Performance I/O for High-Performance Storage Engines - VLDB Endowment, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.vldb.org/pvldb/vol16/p2090-haas.pdf

On-disk Index | Milvus Documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://milvus.io/docs/disk_index.md

(PDF) Improving I/O Performance via Address Remapping in NVMe Interface, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.researchgate.net/publication/365385951_Improving_IO_Performance_via_Address_Remapping_in_NVMe_Interface

CPU cache - Wikipedia, accessed September 11, 2025, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CPU_cache

Understanding CPU Cache Organization and Structure - DEV Community, accessed September 11, 2025, https://dev.to/sachin_tolay_052a7e539e57/understanding-cpu-cache-organization-and-structure-4o1o

The faiss library - arXiv, accessed September 11, 2025, https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.08281

Demystifying FAISS, Vector indexing, and ANN - Kaggle, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.kaggle.com/code/akashmathur2212/demystifying-faiss-vector-indexing-and-ann

Database Caching Strategies - DEV Community, accessed September 11, 2025, https://dev.to/kalkwst/database-caching-strategies-16in

Top 8 Cache Eviction Strategies - ByteByteGo, accessed September 11, 2025, https://bytebytego.com/guides/top-8-cache-eviction-strategies/

Key eviction | Docs - Redis, accessed September 11, 2025, https://redis.io/docs/latest/develop/reference/eviction/

7 Cache Eviction Strategies. Caching is a technique to make… | by Premchandu | Medium, accessed September 11, 2025, https://medium.com/@premchandu.in/7-cache-eviction-strategies-you-should-know-0bc4f08fd414

Zope Object Database - Wikipedia, accessed September 11, 2025, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zope_Object_Database

Zope Object Database (ZODB) - Plone 6 Documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://6.docs.plone.org/backend/zodb.html

Introduction — ZODB documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://zodb.org/en/latest/introduction.html

About Instances and Threads, Performance and RAM consumption ..., accessed September 11, 2025, https://5.docs.plone.org/manage/deploying/performance/instancesthreads.html

ZODB/ZEO Programming Guide - old.Zope.org, accessed September 11, 2025, https://old.zope.dev/Products/ZODB3.2/ZODB%203.2.5/ZODB-3.2.5-zodb.pdf

python - ZODB In Real Life - Stack Overflow, accessed September 11, 2025, https://stackoverflow.com/questions/2388870/zodb-in-real-life

zodbshootout · PyPI, accessed September 11, 2025, https://pypi.org/project/zodbshootout/0.3/

6. ZODB Persistent Components — Zope 4.8.11 documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://zope.readthedocs.io/en/4.x/zdgbook/ZODBPersistentComponents.html

An overview of the ZODB (by Laurence Rowe), accessed September 11, 2025, https://zodb.org/en/latest/articles/ZODB-overview.html

Python sys.settrace() method - Tutorials Point, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.tutorialspoint.com/python/python_sys_settrace_method.htm

Tracing a Program As It Runs — PyMOTW 3, accessed September 11, 2025, https://pymotw.com/3/sys/tracing.html

Tracking Memory Access Patterns in Python Using sys.settrace and Custom Hooks, accessed September 11, 2025, https://dev.to/hexshift/tracking-memory-access-patterns-in-python-using-syssettrace-and-custom-3n08

Demo of DBSCAN clustering algorithm - Scikit-learn, accessed September 11, 2025, https://scikit-learn.org/stable/auto_examples/cluster/plot_dbscan.html

Step-by-Step Guide to Implementing DBSCAN in Python (or R) - Ujang Riswanto - Medium, accessed September 11, 2025, https://ujangriswanto08.medium.com/step-by-step-guide-to-implementing-dbscan-in-python-or-r-0b3066a5835a

Welcome to Faiss Documentation — Faiss documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://faiss.ai/

Special operations on indexes · facebookresearch/faiss Wiki - GitHub, accessed September 11, 2025, https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Special-operations-on-indexes

349 - Understanding FAISS for efficient similarity search of dense vectors - YouTube, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0jOlZpFFxCE

DBSCAN for clustering of geographic location data - Stack Overflow, accessed September 11, 2025, https://stackoverflow.com/questions/34579213/dbscan-for-clustering-of-geographic-location-data

Coroutines and Tasks — Python 3.13.7 documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-task.html

Queues — Python 3.13.7 documentation, accessed September 11, 2025, https://docs.python.org/3/library/asyncio-queue.html

Background Tasks - FastAPI, accessed September 11, 2025, https://fastapi.tiangolo.com/tutorial/background-tasks/

State in Python / Design Patterns - Refactoring.Guru, accessed September 11, 2025, https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/state/python/example

State - Refactoring.Guru, accessed September 11, 2025, https://refactoring.guru/design-patterns/state

python - Implementing prototypes OR instantiating class objects - Stack Overflow, accessed September 11, 2025, https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3042502/implementing-prototypes-or-instantiating-class-objects

hyperdimensional-computing/torchhd: Torchhd is a Python ... - GitHub, accessed September 11, 2025, https://github.com/hyperdimensional-computing/torchhd

torchhd.tensors.fhrr 的源代码 - AiDocZh, accessed September 11, 2025, https://www.aidoczh.com/torchhd/_modules/torchhd/tensors/fhrr.html

QAVSA: Question Answering using Vector Symbolic Algebras - ACL ..., accessed September 11, 2025, https://aclanthology.org/2024.repl4nlp-1.14/

Cognitive Style | Core Mission | Temperature Range | Top_p Range | Use Case Examples

Logical / Deterministic | Factual analysis, structured planning, code generation | 0.1 - 0.4 | 0.7 - 0.85 | Deconstructing a technical problem, writing a SQL query, generating a step-by-step plan.

Balanced / Coherent | Nuanced summarization, pragmatic advice, general conversation | 0.5 - 0.7 | 0.9 - 0.92 | Providing meta-commentary on a process, writing a professional email, summarizing a document.

Creative / Divergent | Brainstorming, novel idea synthesis, artistic expression | 0.8 - 1.2 | 0.95 - 1.0 | Generating creative metaphors, exploring unconventional solutions, writing poetry.

Feature | Class-Based State Pattern | Prototypal State Machine (PSM)

State Definition | Defined as static Python classes in external files. | Defined as live, persistent UvmObject prototypes within the Living Image.

State Instantiation | A new state object is instantiated at transition: self.state = ConcreteStateB(). | No instantiation; the context's delegate pointer is simply changed to reference an existing prototype.

State Transition | Involves object creation and assignment. | A single, atomic pointer swap within a transaction.

Runtime Modifiability | Low. Changing state logic requires editing class files and restarting the system. | High. State behavior can be modified at runtime by directly altering the methods on the state prototypes within the Living Image.

Alignment with "Living Image" | Poor. Relies on static, external code definitions, violating Operational Closure. | Perfect. The entire state machine and its logic are part of the single, persistent, and live-modifiable object world.